=== ROW 5 | f000267 | https://zebra.zfnd.org/ | unknown (living document) | books-courses ===
Zebra - The Zebra Book
Keyboard shortcuts
Press ← or → to navigate between chapters
Press S or / to search in the book
Press ? to show this help
Press Esc to hide this help
Auto
Light
Rust
Coal
Navy
Ayu
The Zebra Book
Getting Started
Docker
Manual Install
CI/CD Architecture
Documentation
User support
Security
License
Zebra is a Zcash full node written in Rust.
Getting Started
You can run Zebra using our Docker
image or you can install it manually.
Docker
This command will run our latest release, and sync it to the tip:
docker run -d \
--name zebra \
-p 8233:8233 \
-v zebrad-cache:/home/zebra/.cache/zebra \
zfnd/zebra:latest
The -p 8233:8233 flag exposes the P2P port so other Zcash nodes can connect to
yours, and -v persists the chain state across restarts (use port 18233 for
Testnet). For more information, read our Docker
documentation.
Manual Install
Building Zebra requires Rust,
libclang, and a C++
compiler. Below are quick summaries for installing these dependencies.
General Instructions for Installing Dependencies
Install cargo and rustc.
Install Zebra’s build dependencies:
libclang, which is a library that comes under various names, typically
libclang, libclang-dev, llvm, or llvm-dev;
clang or another C++ compiler (g++, which is for all platforms or
Xcode, which is for macOS);
protoc (optional).
Dependencies on Arch Linux
sudo pacman -S rust clang protobuf
Note that the package clang includes libclang as well. If you hit a
compiling failure in rocksdb, see the GCC 15 workaround
below.
GCC 15 workaround
GCC 15, which is the default on many recent distros like Arch Linux and Ubuntu
25 onwards, introduces a compiling failure in the version of the rocksdb
dependency used by Zebra. A workaround is running the following before
installing Zebra:
export CXXFLAGS="$CXXFLAGS -include cstdint"
On x86_64 or aarch64 Linux (glibc 2.34+), you can skip the build dependencies
and download a signed, pre-built binary with
cargo binstall:
cargo binstall zebrad
The same binaries are attached to each
GitHub release, with a
SHA-256 checksum, a Sigstore build-provenance attestation, and a Cosign signature.
Otherwise, once you have the dependencies in place, you can build and install
Zebra from source with:
cargo install --locked zebrad
Alternatively, you can install it from GitHub:
cargo install --git https://github.com/ZcashFoundation/zebra --tag v6.0.0 zebrad
You can start Zebra by running
zebrad start
Refer to the Building and Installing
Zebra and Running
Zebra sections in the book for enabling
optional features, detailed configuration and further details.
CI/CD Architecture
Zebra uses a comprehensive CI/CD system built on GitHub Actions to ensure code
quality, maintain stability, and automate routine tasks. Our CI/CD
infrastructure:
Runs automated tests on every PR and commit.
Manages deployments to various environments.
Handles cross-platform compatibility checks.
Automates release processes.
For a detailed understanding of our CI/CD system, including workflow diagrams,
infrastructure details, and best practices, see our CI/CD Architecture
Documentation.
Documentation
The Zcash Foundation maintains the following resources documenting Zebra:
The Zebra Book:
General Introduction,
User Documentation,
Developer Documentation.
User guides of note:
Zebra Health Endpoints — liveness/readiness checks for Kubernetes and load balancers
The documentation of the public
APIs for the latest
releases of the individual Zebra crates.
The documentation of the internal APIs
for the main branch of the whole Zebra monorepo.
User support
If Zebra doesn’t behave the way you expected, open an
issue. We regularly
triage new issues and we will respond. We maintain a list of known issues in the
Troubleshooting section of
the book.
If you want to chat with us, Join the Zcash Foundation Discord
Server and find the “zebra-support”
channel.
Security
Zebra has a responsible disclosure
policy, which
we encourage security researchers to follow.
License
Zebra is distributed under the terms of both the MIT license and the Apache
License (Version 2.0). Some Zebra crates are distributed under the MIT license
only, because some of their code was originally from MIT-licensed
projects. See each crate’s directory for details.
See LICENSE-APACHE and LICENSE-MIT.

