=== ROW 188 | f012237 | https://stadiamaps.com/news/ferrostar-building-a-cross-platform-navigation-sdk-in-rust-part-2 | 2024-12-04T00:00:00 | twir-links ===
Rust on iOS: XCFramework & Swift Package Packaging | Stadia Maps
Products
Overview  Maps  Interactive Maps  Static Maps  Map Styles  Satellite Imagery  Stamen Design  Customize Your Maps
Geocoding & Search  Autocomplete Search  Geocoding  Time Zones
Pricing  Routing & Navigation  Turn-by-Turn Directions  Ferrostar Navigation SDK  Matrix Routing  Traffic-Influenced Routing  Isochrones  Road Information  Elevation
Data & Self-Hosted  On-Prem & Embedded Solutions  Pricing  Documentation  Support
Tools
Build a MapExplore Our Map Styles
Resources
BlogCustomer StoriesFAQsLearn
Login  Get started for free
Products  Pricing  Documentation  Support
ToolsBuild a MapExplore Our Map Styles
ResourcesBlogCustomer StoriesFAQsLearn Login  Get started for free
Back to all posts
Swift PackagingCross-Compiling Rust for iOSGenerating the FFI BindingsBuilding a Fat Library (Universal Binary)Generating the XCFrameworkDistributing the XCFrameworkWrap-up
Ferrostar: Building a Cross-Platform Navigation SDK in Rust (Part 2 - iOS Packaging)
Published: December 3, 2024 · Updated: July 2, 2026 · 12 min read  ·  By Ian Wagner
To ship a Rust library as a Swift Package: cross-compile for three targets (x86_64-apple-ios, aarch64-apple-ios-sim, aarch64-apple-ios), generate Swift bindings with UniFFI, fuse the simulator binaries with lipo, bundle everything into an XCFramework with xcodebuild, and publish with an archive checksum in Package.swift. This guide covers each step with working scripts.
It's been a while since our first deep dive
into the tech behind Ferrostar, our new turn-by-turn navigation SDK.
As a recap, our last post covered why we're writing the core in Rust,
how we approached both code and data model sharing,
and looked at the architecture from a high level.
Writing some code for private use is one thing,
but publishing it for others to use can be maddeningly difficult.
When the time came for us to publish Swift Packages,
we found something closer to the latter.
In this post, we'll cover the practical details of how we
cross-compiled the Rust library for iOS,
packaged it in an XCFramework,
and published it as a Swift Package.
This is the missing manual we wish we had.
Swift Packaging
Let's start off by looking at the Swift Package structure.
We'll need to add two targets to our Package.swift:
a binary target for the static library,
and a Swift target for the generated bindings.
Binary targets in Swift Package Manager can be tricky,
and this complexity makes our Package.swift file a bit unwieldy from the start.
let binaryTarget: Target
let useLocalFramework = false  // NB: Set this to true when developing locally!
if useLocalFramework {
binaryTarget = .binaryTarget(
name: "FerrostarCoreRS",
// IMPORTANT: Swift packages importing this locally will not be able to
// import Ferrostar core unless you specify this as a relative path!
path: "./common/target/ios/libferrostar-rs.xcframework"
)
} else {
// Git stuff which we'll come back to at the end.
let releaseTag = "0.23.0"
let releaseChecksum = "fa308b519db5424d73d00d60ca03fc18c1dcf2f88704aadce29259d12f2de2b2"
binaryTarget = .binaryTarget(
name: "FerrostarCoreRS",
url:
"https://github.com/stadiamaps/ferrostar/releases/download/\(releaseTag)/libferrostar-rs.xcframework.zip",
checksum: releaseChecksum
)
}
Unfortunately, we haven't found a way to use the same Package.swift
unmodified for both local development within the "project" and for publishing.
(To be fair, this is an extremely rare feature,
but it's worth noting that Cargo workspaces let you do this seamlessly with Rust crates.)
So, we need to add some switching logic to our package definition.
The above is the solution we came up with.
We always ensure that useLocalFramework = false for the version checked in to git.
Published versions will need to point to the released artifact,
or else we'd require every developer to check out and build the whole project locally.
For local development and CI builds,
where you may need unreleased changes in the Rust core,
you have to override the value to true.
If anyone knows a cleaner solution to this, let us know!
Another complicating detail is that you need a checksum for remote binary downloads.
This is a safety measure built into the Swift Package Manager
to prevent supply chain attacks.
Since the checksum can't be known until build time,
we have CI rewrite this line in Package.swift when publishing a release.
(We'll cover this dance later.)
One target down... the other is fortunately a bit simpler.
We've called this FerrostarCoreFFI in our project,
to make the distinction clear between the FFI bindings and the Rust binary.
.target(
name: "FerrostarCoreFFI",
dependencies: [.target(name: "FerrostarCoreRS")],
path: "apple/Sources/UniFFI"
)
This is pure Swift and doesn't have any surprises.
It just depends on the binary target,
and includes a source directory which will contain the generated bindings.
You'll need to add both the source and binary target to your list of targets.
You can now reference them by name from any of your other targets,
and/or publish them via products.
Cross-Compiling Rust for iOS
Now that we've looked at the package structure,
let's see what actually goes into the two targets.
We'll tackle cross compilation first.
We're going to compile the Rust code for all the relevant iOS target architectures,
just like Xcode does for our Swift projects.
Cross compilation is quite tricky (maybe even traumatic) in some languages,
but Cargo is full of pleasant surprises.
cargo build --lib --release --target some-target-triple
That's it!
Just specify the target triple!
For iOS, we actually need to compile for three targets:
Target tripleDescription
x86_64-apple-iosSimulator for Intel-based Macs
aarch64-apple-ios-simSimulator for ARM-based Macs
aarch64-apple-iosiOS devices
If you try running this on your machine right now,
you may get an error since you need to have the target toolchain installed.
Fortunately, this is easy.
If you're using rustup, you can add any target with the command
rustup target add your-target-triple.
For iOS, there are just three targets,
but we'll have a LOT more by the time we're done with this series.
Remembering all of these is a lot of work,
but there's a relatively under-appreciated file that can help us out:
rust-toolchain.toml.
If you're using rustup to install cargo,
it will automatically install the relevant toolchains for you!
We can check this into git and call it a day.
Here's the full rust-toolchain.toml for Ferrostar.
While this file is specifically designed for use with rustup,
other build systems often have a way of consuming it too.
For example, Nix users could leverage fenix.fromToolchainFile
to get the same effect.
Generating the FFI Bindings
Now that we have the static library built in its first form,
we need an easy way for Swift to interface with it.
It's UniFFI's time to shine!
Since our first post, UniFFI has evolved a uniffi-bindgen-swift crate concept
with a slightly different CLI.
Not a lot has changed, but it's worth a quick note in case you're on an older version.
If you're starting fresh, this starter template
has everything ready to go with the new setup.
Here's how we generate the bindings:
Run uniffi-bindgen-swift via cargo run -p.
Copy the generated Swift file to the appropriate source directory (the FerrostarCoreFFI target's source path in our example).
Copy the clang module map into a framework staging directory.
Here's the relevant portion of our build script,
where $1 is the name of the library (ferrostar in our case).
cargo run -p uniffi-bindgen-swift -- target/aarch64-apple-ios/release/lib$1.a target/uniffi-xcframework-staging --swift-sources --headers --modulemap --module-name $1FFI --modulemap-filename module.modulemap
mv target/uniffi-xcframework-staging/*.swift ../apple/Sources/UniFFI/
mv target/uniffi-xcframework-staging/module.modulemap target/uniffi-xcframework-staging/module.modulemap
uniffi-bindgen-swift looks at the static library
and generates everything we need to smoothly interact with it from Swift.
This includes enums, protocols, library loading code, etc.;
this is where it does the magic that makes the Rust library feel like a native Swift package.
We just need to copy everything into the location we said in our Package.swift.
NOTE: It is possible to integrate these steps into Xcode.
However, given the relative difficulty of doing this
and the overall flakiness of the Xcode build process,
we opted for a simple, reliable shell script.
This does mean you need to manually rebuild when changing Rust files,
but that's a small step.
Building a Fat Library (Universal Binary)
As a last step before creating the XCFramework,
we need to do something a bit funny and fuse two of our three binary targets together.
The way that XCFramework is designed,
it expects a single binary for each platform, not each CPU architecture.
And we have two binaries for the iOS Simulator platform:
one for the newer Apple Silicon and one for Intel.
To get down to one binary per platform (simulator and device),
we'll use an old tool, lipo to generate a "fat" binary with both architectures
in a single file.
lipo -create target/x86_64-apple-ios/release/lib$1.a target/aarch64-apple-ios-sim/release/lib$1.a -output target/ios-simulator-fat/release/lib$1.a
Generating the XCFramework
Now we finally put all of this together in an XCFramework.
Some teams actually do this by hand,
since it's a relatively simple structure,
but we'll stick to Apple's official tooling.
xcodebuild -create-xcframework \
-library target/aarch64-apple-ios/release/lib$1.a -headers target/uniffi-xcframework-staging \
-library target/ios-simulator-fat/release/lib$1.a -headers target/uniffi-xcframework-staging \
-output target/ios/lib$1-rs.xcframework
This command combines the two static libraries, header, and module map
into a single directory.
And if all went well, we now have a working Swift package that you can test locally!
Distributing the XCFramework
Now it's time to revisit the git and checksum dance that we glossed over at the start.
Here's our distribution checklist:
Zip up the folder.
Compute a checksum for the archive.
Update Package.swift with your release tag and checksum.
We script this in our CI actions like so:
ditto -c -k --sequesterRsrc --keepParent target/ios/lib$1-rs.xcframework target/ios/lib$1-rs.xcframework.zip
checksum=$(swift package compute-checksum target/ios/lib$1-rs.xcframework.zip)
version=$(cargo metadata --format-version 1 | jq -r --arg pkg_name "$1" '.packages[] | select(.name==$pkg_name) .version')
sed -i "" -E "s/(let releaseTag = \")[^\"]+(\")/\1$version\2/g" ../Package.swift
sed -i "" -E "s/(let releaseChecksum = \")[^\"]+(\")/\1$checksum\2/g" ../Package.swift
ditto is an archiving utility found on all macOS systems.
We use this to create the ZIP archive.
Then, we compute the checksum using swift package compute-checksum.
This utility is included in the Xcode Command-line Tools.
For versioning, our repository prefers to keep all platforms in sync,
and derives all versions from the Rust project using a bit of CLI magic.
To update Package.swift, we use trusty old sed to rewrite the relevant lines in-place.
For your package to be usable by others,
you'll need to host your XCFramework for download somewhere and update Package.swift
with an archive checksum and git tag.
We use GitHub's release artifact hosting since it's easy and free,
but you can also self-host the archive.
Wrap-up
Packaging a binary framework for iOS isn't easy,
and the best practices have evolved in the last few years.
Which is probably why no comprehensive (modern) guide exists for our use case!
We hope this helps anyone else shipping binary frameworks on iOS.
We've been using this process for about a year and a half for Ferrostar,
and have automated all the steps with shell scripts and CI workflows.
If you're curious to try this in your own project,
check out the UniFFI starter,
which includes ready-to-go build scripts and all the rest of the project boilerplate.
And for a "real-world" CI pipeline on GitHub Actions,
check out the iOS Release action for Ferrostar.
In the next installment, we'll cover the build process and packaging for Android.
Give us a follow on social media, join our Slack or Discord communities,
or subscribe to our mailing list to get the news first!
Share:
About Ian Wagner
Founder & Chief Architect
Ian is co-founder of Stadia Maps and leads engineering and operations. He works on routing, navigation, and the technical foundations that keep customer applications reliable at scale.
More posts by Ian Wagner Connect with Ian Wagner
Related Posts
Ferrostar: Building a Cross-Platform Navigation SDK in Rust (Part 1)
Why Stadia Maps built Ferrostar's core in Rust with UniFFI: cross-platform architecture, Cargo workspace setup, and idiomatic Swift/Kotlin bindings.
November 15, 2023
The Invisible Costs of Routing: Privacy, Pricing, and Avoiding the "MAU" Trap
Compare mapping SDKs on privacy and pricing. Stadia Maps is private by design and bills on usage only — no data harvesting, no MAU fees.
June 10, 2026
Our SwiftUI DSL Is Joining the MapLibre Family
The MapLibre SwiftUI DSL, started at Stadia Maps, is now an official MapLibre project, bringing first-class SwiftUI support to MapLibre on iOS.
October 7, 2024
Ferrostar: Building a Cross-Platform Navigation SDK in Rust (Part 1)
Why Stadia Maps built Ferrostar's core in Rust with UniFFI: cross-platform architecture, Cargo workspace setup, and idiomatic Swift/Kotlin bindings.
November 15, 2023·23 min read
The Invisible Costs of Routing: Privacy, Pricing, and Avoiding the "MAU" Trap
Compare mapping SDKs on privacy and pricing. Stadia Maps is private by design and bills on usage only — no data harvesting, no MAU fees.
June 10, 2026·5 min read
Our SwiftUI DSL Is Joining the MapLibre Family
The MapLibre SwiftUI DSL, started at Stadia Maps, is now an official MapLibre project, bringing first-class SwiftUI support to MapLibre on iOS.
October 7, 2024·3 min read
Business Outcomes That Fuel Your Growth
With Stadia Maps, you build the solutions that matter. Logistics platforms provide accurate ETAs, fleet management apps reduce fuel costs, and emergency dispatch systems improve response times.
Get started for free  Explore documentation  Contact us
Overview
Maps
Geocoding & Search
Routing & Navigation
Data & Self-Hosted
Pricing  Support  Sign Up
Official SDKs
Tools
Resources
Solutions
Ready for a Change?
Company
Learn
Stay in Touch Bluesky  Discord  GitHub  LinkedIn  Mailing List  Mastodon  Reddit  X
Legal Terms of Service  Privacy Policy  Data Processing Addendum
Overview
Maps  Interactive Maps  Static Maps  Map Styles  Satellite Imagery  Stamen Design  Customize Your Maps
Geocoding & Search  Autocomplete Search  Geocoding  Time Zones
Routing & Navigation  Turn-by-Turn Directions  Ferrostar Navigation SDK  Matrix Routing  Traffic-Influenced Routing New Isochrones  Road Information  Elevation
Data & Self-Hosted  On-Prem & Embedded Solutions
Pricing
Support
Sign Up
Official SDKs MCP Server  JavaScript & TypeScript  Python  Kotlin  Swift  PHP  Ferrostar Navigation SDK  Autocomplete Search for MapLibre GL JS  Autocomplete Search for SwiftUI  Autocomplete Search for Jetpack Compose
Tools Build a Map  Explore Our Map Styles
Resources Documentation  Blog  Customer Stories  Meetup Sponsorships New Changelog  FAQs  Infrastructure  Status
Solutions AI  Logistics  Real Estate  Travel  Outdoors
Ready for a Change? Switch to Stadia Maps  Google Maps Alternatives  Mapbox Alternatives  MapTiler Alternatives
Company About  Attribution  Privacy Commitment
LearnCan You Store Geocoding Results?What Does a "Free" Map API Actually Cost?What Is the Best Geocoding API?What Is the Best Routing API? See all
Stay in Touch Bluesky  Discord  GitHub  LinkedIn  Mailing List  Mastodon  Reddit  X
Legal Terms of Service  Privacy Policy  Data Processing Addendum
See what users say and leave a review
See what users say and leave a review
© 2026 Stadia Maps, Inc.

=== ROW 189 | f012428 | https://youtube.com/watch?v=K5SY-lc8nTE | 2025-03-26T00:00:00 | twir-links ===
[00:02]
Hi, I'm Nas. I'm the CEO and founder of
Rebel and the author of developer life
and maintainer of the Rebel, Dewey
Crates. I believe that open source comes
from an open heart and from the joy of
coding. In today's video, we're going to
talk about Rust polymorphism. Uh I
actually have a couple of videos that uh
and a couple articles on developer life
I've done so far. Uh one was on the type
state pattern. Uh that was actually
quite popular on YouTube. And then
recently I did another one on
um uh the new type uh design pattern uh
which was it's also proving to be quite
popular. So I decided to follow on with
this one. Uh I've been meaning to make
this for a while now. Um a while couple
of months ago I did a this um lifetimes
uh video and article and I talked about
subtyping and variance and
um uh one of the things like if you're
coming from an object-oriented uh
background uh then rest can seem a
little bit
um restrictive in many ways because it
[01:03]
expects ultra concrete types and
generics. It monomorphizes and so you
can you can downcast uh references and
things like that but it's a bit
cumbersome than probably other languages
um that are object-oriented let's say
because in in Rust there's no no cost
abstractions so there's no garbage
collection and there's other benefits
for there's a there's there's a
trade-off um having said that though in
today's example I wanted to give like
unfortunately most of the examples and
I'm uh again I'm also at fault for doing
this But uh I did the cat, dog, and
animal whatever example, which I don't
know. I It's kind of like it it's not
that good. I don't like it. So um uh I
might actually update this after this
video. But uh so today uh in today's
video I'm going to do u an actual
example like a real world example of
[02:03]
using polymorphism to model something
that you would find in um very common
like uh Android view hierarchy or like a
react components or something like that
like some object-oriented system where
you have some user interface library and
that user interface library has this
concept of a view uh like in a browser
you can have like um the DOM
where there's nodes, but then there's
buttons and the button is a subclass of
node and uh and then in Android there's
a views where there's like a top level
uh uh class called view and then you can
subclass that you can make like a button
or something like that. So um I wanted
to uh model something like that in in in
Rust and show how we could we could
implement that polymorphism in Rust. Um
but um since there is no uh inheritance
per se like uh what we're going to be
using is uh uh subtyping and
specifically traits. So trait subtypes.
So
[03:04]
um uh these are all really good videos
to actually this one um what we're going
to cover today will
actually kind of touch upon this as
well. Um it's related to this um the uh
new type design pattern and then uh yeah
and these are all good the subtyping
variance uh video is good to one to
watch. Oh, actually I already had that
open. Um and um and and then so is um
this uh lifetimes uh article on
developerlife.com. And also related to
that is um type state design pattern for
um sort of a more complex way of uh
modeling uh
polymorphism. So um let's see with that
said let us get to our live coding
example. So let's see one thing I want
to do is first of all let
me create a new crate. I'm going to call
that
[04:05]
[Music]
polymorphism and then let's open it up
in code insiders
uh polymorphism. Oops.
Okay, great. And then let's close this.
anymore. Okay. So, um let's see. The
first thing we're going to do is
uh let's kind of actually let's make a
new
file. You know what? I can actually do
the whole thing
here as um actually I'm just going to
dump it on lib RS. Like there's no
reason to uh it's just going to be one
example. Um I don't think this video is
going to be that big. So So let's see.
So the the at the most basic level the
the thing uh let's do this. We're going
to uh create some concrete
uh types which are simple. And so um
[05:06]
what we want to do here is we want to
create a view. Uh a view is going to
have um dimensions. So it'll have like a
uh they call like sizing and
positioning. So essentially there's
going to be a width and a height and an
x and a y position which is is is what a
view is. It it contains that
information. And then we're going to
create something called a
component which um is is a view but it
also has an added capability which is
that it can render itself. And so this
is this is the example of that sort of
hierarchy where you can have like a
button that's a view uh but you can also
have a label that's a view or a text
field that's a view and and so on. So
let's let's start from the bottom up and
let's let's create these
um width and height. So when uh because
we learned uh from the new type video
here that instead of using U sizes all
[06:07]
over the place, it's uh it's nice to
have, you know, actually let's custom uh
custom type. So we can have like one
called width which just wraps around uh
a U size. Uh then we can have a height
and I think we
need a couple of derives for this. We
need because we're going to write some
tests. Uh, so we need Yeah, that sounds
good.
Um, let me just copy this here. So, we
got uh width height. Then we're going to
have a um x
position. So, we're going to do x, which
is this. And we're going to do a y. And
same thing, let's just grab those
derives. Okay. So, now we have the
um Oh, let me zoom in. There we go.
That's better.
Uh so now we have the the most basic
building blocks of um what we're going
to uh represent using our polymorphic
design. So let's make um using these
base types. Let's let's kind of build up
[07:08]
and make a uh like I'm going to call it
dimens
dimension actually let's call it it's
like dimens so dimens 2D like dimension
2D uh where there the strct has a width
and a height and it has an x and a y so
so far so good nothing really even
remotely interesting at this point so
here we just have uh using the new type
pattern I'm I'm stubbing out some of the
things I'll be I'll be using in a
minute. So then now I'm going to jump
right into the traits and the
um the subtyping. So
um so let's do traits. Um so the the
first thing we're going to have is uh a
trait that is a view.
And the view is going to um let's say in
this case I'm actually going to make
this example a little bit a little bit
somewhat needlessly complicated cuz I
wanted to incorporate generics as well.
[08:10]
But uh so here um the view can just we
can literally just have a view um where
we can say something like uh get demands
uh and that returns a demens 2D uh and
So, but uh since we're this is all about
traits and polymorphism, what if we
wanted to abstract demens 2D
uh out of this for whatever reason since
uh maybe we have a dimens 3D or maybe we
have some other kind of demens. So, um
uh so let's do this. we can uh can
replace it with T and we can say um okay
if you take a view uh of type T then it
you can T is the the generic
uh argument that you have to pass and
demands 2D would be u would be that so
what if we further restrict its bounds
just just to kind of show the syntax of
like because this is this is prep like
we're we're we're going to do this with
view in just a moment so I just wanted
[09:12]
to show this happening with with other
other traits. So we can say that uh the
view can be generic over any t as long
as that t
uh is clone and copy. Let's just take
out partially actually we could do this
because if you
noticed all of these have that in fact I
could go even further. I could say
debug. So the these trade bounds
essentially oh actually this I need to
import. No what's the
problem?
Uh
yes. Okay, let's do
that. Wonder what debug it was
importing. Uh there we go. Okay, so uh
so here um essentially I've taken this
whole our derive block and just put it
here. But this is just to show that um
here I'm using trade bounds and the
trade bounds here essentially say that
the view could be generic over any T as
[10:13]
long as that T uh satisfies these trade
bounds which means that T has to
implement debug copy clone partial Q and
EQ which is which is fine. So somewhat
arbitrary but kind of like just to kind
of introduce that syntax. So so view has
XY width and height. Um so in this case
I've made it generic over T. So if I
don't want dimens 2D, I can make some
other kind of demands and I can have a
view that's generic over whatever that
like for example I can make obstruct
dimens 2D
alt where I can have like sizes for you
know whatever um and
then uh let's make a test real
quick. Uh actually let's just write a
um uh test view and here what we can do
is something along the lines of
[11:14]
um let's say I wanted to make a
demens 2D it would be one of these. If I
wanted to make demens 2D alt it would be
one of those. And then now I can create
a
[Music]
um a view basically. Uh so let's just
say so the thing is I haven't
implemented the let's do this. Uh I
haven't uh made anything that implements
this view. So
um what we can do is we could just say
like
Actually we can't uh so I need to I need
to make an implementation of this before
I can continue with this example. So
let's just table this for now and we'll
come back to it in a minute. Okay. So
what what would the
uh uh let's actually do this demens
2D we'll say something like this. um to
do
[12:19]
uh yeah exactly for demens 2D and demens
2D alt
okay so here um actually you know what
let me just take out this demens 2
studio alt for now cuz uh we'll come
back to this later um so let's just well
this is not that interesting I can make
it amends but uh I don't have anything
that implements this trait so uh and and
this trait doesn't have any default
implementations so we can't really do
anything with it um except for mark
something uh in as a trade bound uh to
take this. So, so here
um I guess we could do something like
this. This is kind of actually let's
just bring back um this is
totally like this won't do anything but
defize
us size. Uh and so here I can say
something like let's just ditch this for
[13:20]
now. Uh we can say something like uh pub
type uh fu equals uh view over demands
2D and I can say uh view over demens 2D.
works. So, that's not a thing either.
Type a few demands
2D.
[Music]
Oh, no.
Didn't expected a type of trait.
Oh, right. Cuz it's not okay. So, what
I'm trying to do is not going to be
possible without first um creating a
concrete implementation of the string. I
uh I was trying to do something that was
not possible. I was trying to make like
[14:22]
um get the compiler to compile something
that wasn't going to compile. So, um
okay.
So, uh aborting that, let's continue
with um creating this um
uh essentially this you can consider
this to be the superass. um if we were
talking object orientation. So you can
think about okay what if I want a
subclass that inherits from this that
means it has all of the things the view
has but it's got more. So then I can say
that can be my component uh
trait where um this is completely
redundant um where I can say I have a
render function which which just takes
uh self that means when when I render it
actually I can do something like this
and I can return a string. If you wanted
to get even more complex, we could do O
which uh can be like you know debug and
clone or something and then we can say
oh but now uh in in this particular case
[15:23]
uh whatever this output type is we have
to be it has to be specified in the
component which is fine that's that's
not a problem. So here we have two
traits. Uh the view you can get and set
the demens and the demens can be
anything that implements debug, copy,
clone, partially cue and so on. We could
even make another trait which demens 2D
and demands 2D alt implement. So I can I
can say something like
uh a trait which has uh a demens trait
which has a width, height x and y. But
that's just getting too complicated. But
this is just this is just to show trade
bounds and this is just to show that
um like component uh does this. But
notice that there is no relationship
between uh uh right now uh between uh
the component and and the view. So we
want we want that uh superclass subclass
relationship and and the way to do that
[16:26]
uh there we go has that trait bound
um has to be essentially
uh this is uh all of this uh t has to do
all of this and t also has to implement
view. So I'm sorry uh component has to
uh implement uh view. So basically we're
saying the component trait which I could
like now I regret typing all this out
because you can almost like think of it
this way. So component of something
uh actually that's not right. Uh this
would be O. So this is O. You can almost
think of it that way. uh where this is
not going to it's it's saying that your
trade bounds are are not satisfied
because now because I put all this stuff
in here. So um but yeah so so
essentially that's what we're doing here
with this syntax is
[17:27]
that we're saying that the component
um is a subtype of this other trait and
the super the super trait this would be
the super trait and this is the
sub trait and you can see this
relationship similar to this with copy
and clone
um like um I think copy
Let's see. Yeah, see the copy is the sub
trade and clone is a super trade. So
that kind of sort sort of like what we
did but much more noisy with a lot more
uh generics and tradem. Okay. So we have
a super trait and we have a subtrait and
then we have a bunch of concrete types.
So not uh so far so good. Um so then now
uh what we can do is because
the subtrait
um uh which is component inherits from
view it's not really inherits is a
[18:28]
subtype of the view type the view
superype or the super trait sorry not
type uh now that the component is uh
subtype of the view trait uh we can do
Uh and here we can do something like
this. We can make another trait like
component
alt where
um it it has a render uh function just
like this one. But I can I can do some
other needless things. I can say
something like I want
to access this um whatever it self is
whoever implements component alt I want
to almost like downcast them and access
them as if they were a view. So I can do
that because I know that a component
alt is a view. So I can take I can
[19:28]
create a a function a method that takes
self and
returns a type view. Uh so this is and
it's that check this is that amperand uh
den basically. So he this is for sizing
reasons but you you essentially what
we're saying is that okay I have a I
have a thing that's a component alt but
if I wanted to I could also access it as
a
view and you can also um uh access the
uh mutable view. So you can say
something like as view mute get a
mutable uh reference. Uh so basically
you're saying that okay I'm a component
alt uh uh and somebody wants to access
me the component alt whoever implements
a straight as if I was immutable view.
So that can be done but this is
redundant. We're not going to this is
uh this is redundant because um these
these two uh are we actually get that
[20:28]
because that's what this
means. That's the that's the subrade
part. So that's why this is we're not
going to implement this, but I just
wanted to show that if you wanted you
could you could write things out like
this. That's that's totally um that's
valid um uh in the type system. So now
uh let's let's actually implement um so
let's do some
uh trait implementations. So um actually
let's do
this. Put some dashes around here. So
like
this. Um and here we have some concrete
types.
Okay. So for trade implementations, what
we're going to do is
uh let's make
um two uh two two strcts. Let's make a
um a button. Actually, why not? Let's
just make a uh
[21:30]
button. And we're going to make a label.
Yeah. So now this is just a module. And
inside this module for the
button, what I'm going to do is I'm
going to create a
strct called button 2D. And it's going
to take a uh it's going to contain a
demens. Uh this is I'm setting it up so
that we can implement the traits uh for
this
strct and then uh because it's set up
this way now we can uh essentially
implement the those traits the two
traits component trait and view trait
just uh ignore this redundant uh
component alt actually let me just hide
this. So, okay. So, now we have um we're
going to uh implement
uh view of and we're going to say that
this is um demens 2D. I this is a bit
noisy cuz I'm not really passing demens
2D down into I mean technically we could
[22:33]
do something like this but that would
be like this. Um, and then kind of keep
going. But then it just it just it just
I just wanted to like not do that. Uh,
just kind of stop with this
um, uh, passing the generics everywhere.
Uh, kind of constrain it just just to
kind of prove the point that okay, we
have trade bounds. That was that was the
only intention just to introduce this
trade bound. Um so so here we're going
to say something like okay we have a
view of uh which is generic over the
concrete type demands 2D
uh and
then uh and then we're going to
implement the the get demands and the
set demands methods from the button 2D
uh for button 2D from the de uh sorry
from the uh view uh trait. That's where
how all these three different things
came together. So, so far so good. And
that was a lot of setup for not much
code. And um and here we have like
[23:37]
um we're going to implement a component
for a demens 2D. That's the uh that's
the the for whatever reason I made this
generic. Uh and it it's going to return
a string when it's rendered. Uh and it's
going to do that for button 2D. And it
just basically just dumps this. It goes
button 2D with height x and y. Okay.
So, so far so good. Uh, so let's do
something like this for label. Uh, where
it's going to look almost exactly the
same where we're going to say we have a
label uh 2D which uh contains a demands
2D and there it implements both view and
component.
And for uh component instead of instead
of returning button 2D blah blah blah it
says label 2D blah blah blah. So that's
a bit of a madeup example, but it it's
meant to show the relationship between
uh view uh the view trait, the component
trait for a particular strct and then
the same thing for another strct. Um and
[24:39]
then showing how the relationship
between view and component is is is
specified. That's this
um the subtyping thing. So um oh where
are we? Yeah. And then uh so let's see
this. Uh so we have
um let's see. So we got uh we got the
label done. We got the button done. And
now
uh uh for more type system fun, let's do
this. Let's make some functions that
uh operate specifically on the subtypes.
So,
uh
the work with the
sub trait the subtrait type but I'm just
going to and then we're going to have
functions that work with the super
[25:43]
trait. Okay. So the this the subtrait in
this case um
is component and the super trait is
view. So let's do that uh backwards. Uh
so we can do the sort of more the view
stuff first and then we can do the this
is view and the sub trait is the
component.
So and these are just just to show uh
the signatures of the functions uh just
so that to get comfortable with type
system and how it handles all these
things.
So here we can say something like pubfn
uh component uh
render and
essentially uh it's saying that there's
a function called component render
um generic type
arguments
[26:49]
say is something that
uh essentially this is
the we have monomorphization or static
dispatch and dynamic dispatch and so
this is dynamic dispatch. So essentially
we're saying that whatever this is it's
a reference to
something that implements a trait and we
don't know what the size of that is. So
because that's the den keyword and so um
so this is dynamic dispatch not monomor
mon monomorphization or static dispatch
which would be like imple or something
something along these lines. So
um okay so so here actually this works
too. So, but just to kind of keep
things consistent in this example or
maybe I'll do one like this. I'll do
another one with imple. Okay. So, here
we have like uh if I pass an argument
that you know implements this component
trait, this function will rece is able
to receive it. So, if I do something
like
[27:57]
size. So, check this out.
on? Oh that's because it's missing.
Basically you have to copy this type
signature everywhere because in Rust
it's at the function level like you have
to like repeat yourself. So the compiler
can match things up. Okay. So here it's
the same thing as component render but
the diff. So I'm taking I'm receiving an
argument whose type is um anything that
implements a component trait but I turn
around and I call get demens on it which
is implement by which is implemented by
the trait. So and furthermore I can do
something like this and that also works.
This is so this is dynamic dispatch and
this is static dispatch or
monomorphization. This is virtual uh
[28:59]
virtual tables and or v table to do this
lookup at runtime and this is statically
done at compile time. So but it's
equivalent. I mean it does the same
thing. So let's make another function um
for set size
where here I'm receiving an argument
whose type essentially is anything that
you know implements a component trait
but I can call set amends on it and if
you recall sets is a method that we had
set on the view trait. So I'm not
treating this this argument which is a
component as if it's a view. I'm
treating this argument which is a
component as if it's a view. And here
I'm using the argument which is a
component as a component. So this is an
example of like receiving
um uh receiving uh arguments of
different types and then how the
components can kind of be like you can
you can receive an argument which is a
component and you know that it's a view.
But if you receive a component that's a
view you know it's not an argument which
is what we're going to see next. So this
is the um I'm sorry when you receive a
view you know it's not a component. So
that argument view argument is not a
[30:00]
component. So let's do this. So we can
uh oh wait a super
backwards. Yeah totally. Oops. Um it's
supposed to be
there. Yeah. Okay. So
um yeah the subrate is let's see where
did we define these things.
Um yeah the subrate is component because
component has a this colon view which
means this is a sub trait and that's a
super trait. Oops.
Um yeah that I sorry I put the labels
backwards but yeah this is still valid.
I mean so it's essentially if I get a
component I can treat the component as
if it was a view but if I receive a view
I cannot treat it as if it's a component
because of the subtyping relationship.
So um so you can think of it as like a
[31:01]
component is a more specialized view
that means all components are views but
not all views are
components and then we implement
component as well uh for particular
strcts. So that's how how we get that uh
polymorphism. So these functions will
work uh whether I give it um
uh in this case a label 2D uh or a
button 2D and we'll see that in the
tests below. So this is just kind of
seeding. We're going to do write a bunch
of tests to see how actually this is
like we're defining the functions and
then we're going to see how calling them
calling uh calling them using them how
what that actually looks and feels like.
So here we have um the only only
uh actually wait a minute where's render
okay so this one view only has uh if we
look at
view I think set dimensions yeah only
has setter and getter. So here we're
going to say view
[32:02]
uh we're going to say get size uh
and we're just going to take
something that uh is implements a view
trait and then all we can do with that
is just call get demens and then we can
do
view set size
oops uh view set size and yeah there we
go. What we cannot do, we cannot have
view render. That's that's no, that's a
no-go. This is not going to
compile. Well, what copilot did is it
sneakily did that. But if you you see
doesn't
work, view doesn't need the string
because there is no render. See the
render function the render method has an
extra type which view doesn't need. If
you noticed like
um if you look at the view stuff, we
didn't have to specify the output type.
We only have to specify the the T in
this case. These are terribly named. I
[33:03]
should have made this like inner T and
output or something or rendered output.
But um yeah, so as you can see the type
system is already preventing us from
doing something that's not possible.
Like we cannot render we cannot call
render view. Uh view also doesn't need
um all of this. So if we if we copied
this uh
signature uh oops uh view demon like um
it it doesn't actually doesn't even need
um yeah this is pretty straightforwards
actually. So
um actually we could do something
like actually you know what uh let's see
if I were to kind of mimic this style.
So we would do
something like
that and then instead of taking the
demands
2D and as you can see it's complaining
but actually let's just ditch these
these are just noise. Uh it's it's
complaining because um we don't need
[34:17]
see expected struck demands to
D. Oh, oops. Uh, this should be T.
Sorry, got confused. So let's do okay.
So this is saying that this is more like
written in this style where we're we're
not we're not uh tying it to demens
2D. So that's the thing to make rust
more polymorphic.
Uh arguably it's more verbose and
somewhat confusing especially if you're
coming from something like cotlin or
java or typescript.
Um definitely this is a lot more work as
you could see but all that work was so
that we don't use demens 2D all this
stuff but we can we can we can continue
we can say you know view set size in
that same
style and
here it kind of unfortunately it gets a
little bit uh more confusing because
[35:17]
now I mean you you can do like like Here
we did
um you can say imple
so you can you don't have to use this
den so it's
monomorphized. So yeah
there it's it's not it's not like super
straightforward unfortunately there's a
there's a bit of like um there's a lot
of like syntax I guess to look at but I
guess it is what it is. So here um if we
did view render um we could if we wanted
to get rid of demens 2D because that's a
you know concrete type we could do
something like
that but um this won't work because even
if we did like this because render
method is not implemented for the view
so uh thus we cannot really this is not
a thing that we can do. So there you go.
I'm just going to take it out because
[36:18]
this is just weird. Um but yeah, so
that's that's an example of like the
type system. Okay, even even if you kind
of generate uh this
um demands 2D
um you still can't call render on a
view. So regardless of what the T and
the O is. So that that's what this
actually I'm going to leave it
in. We're not doing anything with arc
anyway. Okay. So the this is like um
functions which receive uh arguments of
those sub trait or the super trait and
what we can and cannot do with
them.
So with that done let us write some
tests. So this is going to be mod
tests you super actually did I write a
test
[Music]
already? No.
Okay. So, in these tests, uh, let's make
like some defaults. So, we're going to
say something like,
[37:18]
um, we're going to make something called
small, which is a demens 2D, and we're
going to say it's
100.
Oops. Uh, what is this? And uh,
10, whatever, 20. And then we're going
to have con
um
large which is also going to be defense
2D and this is going to be 200 100 3040.
Perfect. So okay we have some defaults
that we created because we're going to
write a bunch of tests. So let's start
with the
uh those substrate functions that we had
uh these things. Let's exercise them.
So this is the we can say mod pop mod
sub
uh trait
uh oops use
super
[38:20]
okay don't know what that is um okay
there we go and here we can
do similar thing we're going to say
super
trait functions and we're going to do
Okay. Oh my goodness. Uh okay, perfect.
So, uh now we have subrate and subrate
functions. Um let's
[Music]
see. Yeah, that looks good. Um and then
we're going to we're going to exercise
because I I get confused with the which
is which. So now it's in a module and so
cannot get that confused
again. So the super is
view, the sub is component sub super.
Perfect. I should have done the modules
to begin with to keep from getting
confused. All right. So uh now we're
going to do uh a test on
[39:21]
the let's do
the
uh where is it these things the sub
trait. So component uh
and component can do more the sub trait
can do more than the super trade. The
super trade can do
less. I always mistake like the super
has super can do more but actually no
super means
ancestor. Think of it like evolution and
how like our ancestors crawled out of
the ocean.
So they they didn't have rest. We do. So
they're the super where the sub. The sub
has more things it can do than the
super. Yeah.
Uh anyway, so uh so in the subrate uh
let's do this. Uh let us pull in
uh
[40:23]
the actually what are we pulling in? We
got to pull in
the actually let's do this.
Um, let's make a
button component. And that's going to
be a button. Uh, yep, that's right.
Demand small cuz um, essentially just
wrapping
small. So, we're going to make a button
and we're going to make a label
uh, mute label because we need something
to pass to those functions uh, from
here. That's what this is. And then uh
we can do something like this component
uh render which we know we can do
because I think oh it's comp render.
Oops.
Um and let's import
this. Ah what the heck? Let's qualify
it. So
um so we're saying that okay we're
[41:25]
pulling in um component render from the
subject functions and we're passing to
it a button component which is totally
cool. We can do
that. We can then do the same thing to
label component. So now we can render a
button and we can render uh a label.
This is just a very strange way of
writing it but just to kind of actually
why are these mutable?
Okay. So um then
um when these are
rendered it returns an O. So we can we
can say output one. Oh, actually button
uh we can say
button output is uh the string and we
can say uh what is this label output is
that whatever and then we can say
something like um actually we can see
print button output actually we don't
[42:25]
need to say button out we can just do
oops uh button
button output and we can say label
output and then let's just see what this
looks
like. So the button is a button with a
width and a height of 150. Actually this
is a mistake. Uh this should be
medium. I want to be able to tell them
apart. So actually this large I think.
Oops. There we Oh, dang. Okay. So now
when you run it, you can see one of them
is the a button with a some width and
height and a label with a bigger width
and height. So something like that.
Okay, so that that makes sense. And then
so we can do like
uh since the uh button just has a
dimension in it, um we can get the mens.
So we can say something like
[43:27]
uh assert eq uh we can say uh button
component get demands is small and uh
the other one is large because that's
yeah passes no problem. So yeah, this is
an example of using the subrate uh the
function that takes the subrate um as an
argument and then just basically turning
around and calling the render uh method
on it. So now let's do the same thing
with uh we're just kind of going through
all the different types of syntax that
we might encounter when using super and
substrates. So here's an example uh
where we just take actually what is this
view set size uh no let's do this
let button size let's do get
size so here I'm doing a similar kind of
thing I'm just making like a I keep
making I don't know why it keeps making
them mutable
[44:27]
uh let's just do this there we go so we
component
size. Okay.
Then we have label size actually because
this one took an
imple. So I'm not being very careful
with like here I just like took
ownership of the thing and I didn't um
and it doesn't matter because they all
implement the copy trait. But let's just
ignore that for now because that's not
really what the specifics are. But yeah,
if I were to make them equivalent, this
should be amperand because all the other
ones are
amperand uh den. So, but you know what?
I'll leave it leave it that that way.
Okay. So, I got uh I I got uh for I I
was able to call the the the view
[45:29]
function uh the functions to take
the super trait as an argument. Um and
then uh same thing for so I can use a
button. This is a concrete type. A
button or a label. They're both um
views. Uh notice they're also
components. And so I can then do like an
assertion. I can say button size is
small, label size large. And that should
just work. There you go. Nothing that
interesting
there. And this uh notice I cannot
render because I mean well I cannot
render meaning that I can't I well okay
if I call this it's going to panic. So
I'm not going to do that. But if we did
something like
this and we called view render this is
nonsensical. Uh this should not work.
And why is
Debug.
[46:32]
Oh, what? Ver
render.
Oh. Oh my goodness. Something like that.
You know what? I'm just gonna This is
just I'm just going to comment this out.
This code makes no sense. But um there
we go. Now I'm trying to do something
that the compiler is like you can't do
that. I'm like trying to do that. This
is
uh this that that was a exercise in
futility. Compiler did it job. Uh okay.
So um so these are the functions. Now uh
let's say that um
uh instead I wanted to access
um um like instead of using those
functions uh let's just make another
test and here we can say
um so we're going to say access
component as view. So here
um let's say we make a button component,
[47:33]
we make a label component
um we can take the button component
actually let's do this let's make them
both
small and then I can just
call uh on the button component I can
call setmens and set demands is actually
a method on the view trait and since
button component implements both
um view uh and component I can just
treat this exactly like it was a view
and I can do an
assertion and that should be true there
you go and then if I I can obviously I
can render it just like so I can just
say something like let
button uh output
uh equals that and let's say label
output and I can print line this print
[48:35]
line that and you will see that that's
what they look like. They're both the
same have the same dimensions 2D because
I I set them both to large.
So So this is another way of using like
kind of polymorphism in action where I'm
not um actually why have I done this?
This is this is not at all what I
intended to do. Wow. You really got to
check output from uh from this thing.
render. That is what I want to do. And
let's get rid of these. Okay. So, oops.
This is what I intended to do. I mean
the app is the same but I I don't want
to use those helper fun or whatever
those functions that we created. I just
want to like make a button, make a
label. I want to call and these are like
view trait
methods and this is component trait
methods and this is just showing
that we can a component is a
[49:38]
view tlddr because the component is the
subtype and the view is the superype and
so one last thing I want to show is like
where you would even like there's many
use cases in a view hierarchy where you
have a bunch bunch of
components, you know, like you have a
bunch of views and you want to put them
all in the same vec or some sort of
collection. So what would the type of
that collection be? Like how do you how
do you handle that situation? So let's
let's let's take a crack at this. So
this is a very common thing where uh we
want to do
So let's see. So let's make
a a ve a ve of what though?
So we need a ve of something uh which
will hold
um button components and label
components let's say. So and we know
[50:40]
that the component trait is uh
component and then we can say demens
2D like that and
then and then we need to put the date in
there which is and now this takes two so
string and then what this is saying is
that well I don't know what the size of
that is. So, what I'm going to do is
instead of So, I kind of put that I kind
of sneaked that in very quickly. So, I
don't want to um So, that's not going to
work either. Um because this is not a
variable. It's a generic argument. So,
this doesn't work. It's saying
uh I don't know the size. Um so what I'm
saying is that okay I don't know the
size of this whatever it is somestruct
that implements this component trait
which also means it implements view rate
[51:41]
trait which takes this as the the inner
storage and this as the rendered
output I'm like okay I don't know the
size of this because it could be
anything it could be it could be a
button it could be a label whatever it
could be something else uh compiler
doesn't know by putting amperand mute it
means I okay so if I put amper% it means
oh okay cool the the reference to this
thing is sized and if you want to know
about references and sizes this is a
really good article I know it's kind of
irrelevant because this says smart
pointers for the kernel but this
actually does a pretty good job uh this
article I'll link in the references
talking about like what a smart pointer
is like what extra information does it
hold and what are the differences you
know like can you make your own like box
uh uh stuff like that and Um, so yeah,
uh, this is a good this is a good uh
good read for for smart. So, and and I
actually have a bunch of um videos and
articles on this as well. Um,
[52:42]
uh, where is it? Anyway, in in there
somewhere. So,
uh, it's in the videos and articles. So,
um, okay. So, here um because I want to
focus on this I'll put links to the
reference to all of those resources and
the references uh of this video. So here
if I say mute that means that I want to
be able to modify whatever it is that I
put in there which is so and the reason
for that is we have something called
sentiments. Oops where is it? Setiments
and
setiments
requires the
um self to be mutable because when you
get demands you're kind of getting a
read read only view into into the own
data. say it's a borrowed but with
sentiments you can actually modify it.
So that's why you need a
mutable mutable pointer
reference which implements this trait
and we don't know what the size of it is
that's why it's thin but we do know the
[53:42]
size of what that is because it's a
smart
pointer.
um let's see. So
now that was just basically the thing to
store our components. So now you just
make some components like we normally
um our collection. So notice that um
when I push I'm not
pushing Oops. What the heck? uh I'm not
pushing the button, I'm pushing
immutable references to that to that
button. So that's kind of like how this
works. So here I can do now I can make
some assertions. I can say oh actually I
can render them. So I can say
hey look at that it rendered a button in
a label because this is just a
[54:43]
container which contains mutable
references to some type whose size we
don't
know that is guaranteed to implement the
component trait with these two concrete
generic types type type arguments the
inner inner the storage inner storage uh
type is demens 2D and the rendered
string. So there you go. Uh so now we
can do other things like we can now say
assert EQ. We can get it demens. Um and
they're both small because we set them
to small. So
yay. Then we can do something like we
can access
um um actually this one. Where is it?
[55:45]
happened?
it.
[Music]
nope.
Um, actually, why is it doing interm?
This is weird. Um, okay, that was more
copied nonsense.
[Music]
saying? Oh, right.
see cannot borrow button component is
[56:46]
immutable because it is also borrowed
immutable.
Oh, so to avoid stuff like this, you can
do this essentially just take out the
[Music]
below. Ah, right.
So I pushed it in in the the array. So
what I could do is
uh like this
um components one. Actually they're both
going to be small. So let's make this
second one large. So this test has
something to test.
Um
so even though so when I created them I
can write code like this no problem
[57:46]
because I haven't pushed these um
variables into this container which uh
collection which takes
ownership ownership of what of the
mutable
reference. So that's why I was not able
to do
this because it's saying, well, I've
already moved button and label into
components. Go get them from components
cuz, you know, I don't have access to
them anymore because these have been,
you know, these have been
moved. So this works. I can say, oh, get
me the first thing that I put in, which
is the button, and give me the, you
know, second thing. And that's how we
can disamiguate, you know, one from the
other.
um notice that even though this is
button 2D and this is label
2D as far as this collection is
concerned they're both components. So
this is called type
[58:53]
here I know uh that you know button
component is a button 2D label component
2D. This is after type
eraser. Uh they both look to me as if
they're components. So if I were to like
coersse the button component to be a
mutable reference of type button 2D and
not of D component, then I have to
So, but I'm not going to do that because
the whole point of this is to do the to
to be able to use polymorphism and
rather than like take take a
a more
uh vague reference and make it more
specific. I didn't want to say generic
reference because generics mean
something. Um, but yeah, I guess more
concrete concrete and more
abstract. I don't have very many good
[59:55]
words for that. Okay. So now um we can
uh uh so now that we have done that we
can also
um um we can also say for
view and components
uh what the heck is
it? Wow, it really wants this to be
um because it's a you know we can access
the components as if they're views
because this is I'm saying
access as component and here I'm going
to say which is totally redundant
because obviously anything that can be
accessed as a component can be accessed
as a view uh as can be shown
here. So if I run
this, as you can see, it dumps the the
width and the
height. This is the second print line.
That was the first
one. So now we can actually mutate them.
So we can we can say set new dimensions
[60:55]
uh on all the
uh
components which are also
views in the
collection. Finally here where made
copilot happy it got its chance to use
it mute and here I can say oh it's 300
150 50 oh wow uh let's do this let's
just make this a new type so I mean a
constant so we'll call this
um wow such descriptive names um so we
can say con
other demands 2D and just paste that
okay
uh Um, so we just set them to be other.
And then now I can say I can basically
pull out the components again, get their
dimensions and and make sure that it's
other. And this should this should work.
Let's see. There you
[61:57]
go. Wow. So that was a journey through
the type system. Um, because I I didn't
like the cat and the dog
example.
So, I I kind of can see why I did the
cat and the dog example because it fits
in like a few lines of code. This
doesn't. Um, and also I decided I don't
know whether this is more confusing or
not, but I decided to add a little bit
of more generic flavor in here just to
kind of showcase that. Oh, okay. If I
have a a view, so you can think of this
way. This is
like inner storage. I don't know this is
a better word. Um and then here you can
you can say this is inner
storage and this is um render output
render
output. So the inner storage
is like memory where you know its
dimensions are stored
somewhere in something and um in our
[62:59]
case uh this is this is I mean really we
should have another trait called inner
storage which uh says get width get
height get x get y but this was just
kind of like oh okay and inner storage
is anything that has debug copy clone
and partially unq which doesn't make
that much sense.
But it's it's kind of like there's one
more level of complexity to be added to
this example, but then the these lines
would
become longer. Um, but I really wanted
to show the relationship between
component and view and throw
some extra confusion in there just just
to kind of like keep things interesting.
And this should Oops. What the heck?
What was that? Uh, that should build and
test. Yes. And you can always use bacon.
Bacon is awesome. Um, all right. Um,
let's see. So, that pretty much wraps up
um this this life coding video.
Um, if you have any questions about this
video, let me put this up here because
[64:03]
my face is on the whatever one of the
monitors that has
the the articles on them. you can't see
like the this this section of the of the
uh of the video. Okay. So, if you have
questions, uh uh I disable comments on
all my videos uh because sometimes some
of the comments aren't very kind and uh
I can disable them. So, I do. So, uh
please uh if you need to ask any
questions about this or any other uh of
these videos, you know, please feel free
to connect on Discord. Um we have a
newsletter. I don't really send too many
of those out. Um, less than one a month.
Uh, you can sign up for that if you
want. But, uh, definitely if you like
the YouTube channel, uh, please
subscribe. And then, oh, also we have
this, uh, the Rebel Open Core repo which
has tons and tons of real world examples
uh, with all of these patterns in it.
So, uh, give that a look if you're
[65:03]
interested to see how this is used in
real world code.
Uh so with that um thank you for
watching uh today's live coding video.
Uh take care and I will uh you will see
me in the next one. Bye.

