=== ROW 3 | f000233 | https://rust-lang.github.io/async-book | unknown (living document) | books-courses ===
Asynchronous Programming in Rust
Keyboard shortcuts
Press ← or → to navigate between chapters
Press S or / to search in the book
Press ? to show this help
Press Esc to hide this help
Auto
Light
Rust
Coal
Navy
Ayu
## Asynchronous Programming in Rust
NOTE: this guide is currently undergoing a rewrite after a long time without much work. It is work in progress, much is missing, and what exists is a bit rough.
## Introduction
This book is a guide to asynchronous programming in Rust. It is designed to help you take your first steps and to discover more about advanced topics. We don’t assume any experience with asynchronous programming (in Rust or another language), but we do assume you’re familiar with Rust already. If you want to learn about Rust, you could start with The Rust Programming Language.
This book has two main parts: part one is a beginners guide, it is designed to be read in-order and to take you from total beginner to intermediate level. Part two is a collection of stand-alone chapters on more advanced topics. It should be useful once you’ve worked through part one or if you already have some experience with async Rust.
You can navigate this book in multiple ways:
You can read it front to back, in order. This is the recommend path for newcomers to async Rust, at least for part one of the book.
There is a summary contents on the left-hand side of the webpage.
If you want information about a broad topic, you could start with the topic index.
If you want to find all discussion about a specific topic, you could start with the detailed index.
You could see if your question is answered in the FAQs.
What is Async Programming and why would you do it?
In concurrent programming, the program does multiple things at the same time (or at least appears to). Programming with threads is one form of concurrent programming. Code within a thread is written in sequential style and the operating system executes threads concurrently. With async programming, concurrency happens entirely within your program (the operating system is not involved). An async runtime (which is just another crate in Rust) manages async tasks in conjunction with the programmer explicitly yielding control by using the await keyword.
Because the operating system is not involved, context switching in the async world is very fast. Furthermore, async tasks have much lower memory overhead than operating system threads. This makes async programming a good fit for systems which need to handle very many concurrent tasks and where those tasks spend a lot of time waiting (for example, for client responses or for IO). It also makes async programming a good fit for microcontrollers with very limited amounts of memory and no operating system that provides threads.
Async programming also offers the programmer fine-grained control over how tasks are executed (levels of parallelism and concurrency, control flow, scheduling, and so forth). This means that async programming can be expressive as well as ergonomic for many uses. In particular, async programming in Rust has a powerful concept of cancellation and supports many different flavours of concurrency (expressed using constructs including spawn and its variations, join, select, for_each_concurrent, etc.). These allow composable and reusable implementations of concepts like timeouts, pausing, and throttling.
Hello, world!
Just to give you a taste of what async Rust looks like, here is a ‘hello, world’ example. There is no concurrency, and it doesn’t really take advantage of being async. It does define and use an async function, and it does print “hello, world!”:
// Define an async function.
async fn say_hello() {
println!("hello, world!");
}
#[tokio::main] // Boilerplate which lets us write `async fn main`, we'll explain it later.
async fn main() {
// Call an async function and await its result.
say_hello().await;
}
We’ll explain everything in detail later. For now, note how we define an asynchronous function using async fn and call it using .await - an async function in Rust doesn’t do anything unless it is awaited1.
Like all examples in this book, if you want to see the full example (including Cargo.toml, for example) or to run it yourself locally, you can find them in the book’s GitHub repo: e.g., examples/hello-world.
Development of Async Rust
The async features of Rust have been in development for a while, but it is not a ‘finished’ part of the language. Async Rust (at least the parts available in the stable compiler and standard libraries) is reliable and performant. It is used in production in some of the most demanding situations at the largest tech companies. However, there are some missing parts and rough edges (rough in the sense of ergonomics rather than reliability). You are likely to stumble upon some of these parts during your journey with async Rust. For most missing parts, there are workarounds and these are covered in this book.
Currently, working with async iterators (also known as streams) is where most users find some rough parts. Some uses of async in traits are not yet well-supported. There is not a good solution for async destruction.
Async Rust is being actively worked on. If you want to follow development, you can check out the Async Working Group’s home page which includes their roadmap. Or you could read the async project goal within the Rust Project.
Rust is an open source project. If you’d like to contribute to development of async Rust, start at the contributing docs in the main Rust repo.
This is actually a bad example because println is blocking IO and it is generally a bad idea to do blocking IO in async functions. We’ll explain what blocking IO is in chapter TODO and why you shouldn’t do blocking IO in an async function in chapter TODO. ↩
## Navigation
TODO Intro to navigation
By topic
FAQs
Index
## Topic index
Concurrency and parallelism
Introduction
Running async tasks in parallel using spawn
Running futures concurrently using join and select
Mixing sync and async concurrency
Correctness and safety
Cancellation
Introduction
In select and try_join
Performance
Blocking
Introduction
Blocking and non-blocking IO
CPU-intensive code
Testing
Unit test syntax
## Index
Async/async
blocks
closures
functions
traits
c.f., threads
await
Blocking
IO
CPU-intensive tasks
Cancellation
CancellationToken
In select
Concurrency
c.f., parallelism
Primitives (join, select, etc.)
Cooperative scheduling
Executor
Futures
Future trait
IO
Blocking
join
Joining tasks
JoinHandle
abort
Multiple runtimes
Multitasking
Cooperative, yielding
Pre-emptive
Parallelism
c.f., concurrency
Pinning, Pin
race
Reactor
Runtimes
Scheduler
select
Spawning tasks
Tasks
Spawning
Testing
Unit tests
Threads
Tokio
Traits
async
Future
try_join
Unpin
Waiting
Yielding
yield_now
## Part 1: A guide to asynchronous programming in Rust
This part of the book is a tutorial-style guide to async Rust. It is aimed at newcomers to async programming in Rust. It should be useful whether or not you’ve done async programming in other languages. If you have, you might skip the first section or skim it as a refresher. You might also want to read this comparison to async in other languages sooner rather than later.
Core concepts
We’ll start by discussing different models of concurrent programming, using processes, threads, or async tasks. The first chapter will cover the essential parts of Rust’s async model before we get into the nitty-gritty of async programming in the second chapter where we introduce the async and await programming paradigm. We cover some more async programming concepts in the following chapter.
One of the main motivations for async programming is more performant IO, which we cover in the next chapter. We also cover blocking in detail in the same chapter. Blocking is a major hazard in async programming where a thread is blocked from making progress by an operation (often IO) which synchronously waits.
Another motivation for async programming is that it facilitates new models for abstraction and composition of concurrent code. After covering that, we move on to synchronization between concurrent tasks.
There is a chapter on tools for async programming.
The last few chapters cover some more specialised topics, starting with async destruction and clean-up (which is a common requirement, but since there is currently not a good built-in solution, is a bit of a specialist topic).
The next two chapters in the guide go into detail on futures and runtimes, two fundamental building blocks for async programming.
Finally, we cover timers and signal handling and async iterators (aka streams). The latter are how we program with sequences of async events (c.f., individual async events which are represented using futures or async functions). This is an area where the language is being actively developed and can be a little rough around the edges.
## Concurrent programming
The goal of this chapter is to give you a high-level idea of how async concurrency works and how it is different from concurrency with threads. I think it is important to have a good mental model of what is going on before getting in to the practicalities, but if you’re the kind of person who likes to see some real code first, you might like to read the next chapter or two and then come back to this one.
We’ll start with some motivation, then cover sequential programming, programming with threads or processes, and then async programming. The chapter finishes with a section on concurrency and parallelism.
Users want their computers to do multiple things. Sometimes users want to do those things at the same time (e.g., be listening to a music app at the same time as typing in their editor). Sometimes doing multiple tasks at the same time is more efficient (e.g., getting some work done in the editor while a large file downloads). Sometimes there are multiple users wanting to use a single computer at the same time (e.g., multiple clients connected to a server).
To give a lower-level example, a music program might need to keep playing music while the user interacts with the user interface (UI). To ‘keep playing music’, it might need to stream music data from the server, process that data from one format to another, and send the processed data to the computer’s audio system via the operating system (OS). For the user, it might need to send and receive data or commands to the server in response to the user instructions, it might need to send signals to the subsystem playing music (e.g., if the user changes track or pauses), it might need to update the graphical display (e.g., highlighting a button or changing the track name), and it must keep the mouse cursor or text inputs responsive while doing all of the above.
Doing multiple things at once (or appearing to do so) is called concurrency. Programs (in conjunction with the OS) must manage their concurrency and there are many ways to do that. We’ll describe some of those ways in this chapter, but we’ll start with purely sequential code, i.e., no concurrency at all.
Sequential execution
The default mode of execution in most programming languages (including Rust) is sequential execution.
do_a_thing();
println!("hello!");
do_another_thing();
Each statement is completed before the next one starts1. Nothing happens in between those statements2. This might sound trivial but it is a really useful property for reasoning about our code. However, it also means we waste a lot of time. In the above example, while we’re waiting for println!("hello!") to happen, we could have executed do_another_thing(). Perhaps we could even have executed all three statements at the same time.
Whenever IO3 happens (printing using println! is IO - it is outputting text to the console via a call to the OS), the program will wait for the IO to complete4 before executing the next statement. Waiting for IO to complete before continuing with execution blocks the program from making other progress. Blocking IO is the easiest kind of IO to use, implement, and reason about, but it is also the least efficient - in a sequential world, the program can do nothing while it waits for the IO to complete.
Processes and threads
Processes and threads are concepts which are provided by the operating system to provide concurrency. There is one process per executable, so supporting multiple processes means a computer can run multiple programs5 concurrently; there can be multiple threads per process, which means there can also be concurrency within a process.
There are many small differences in the way that processes and threads are handled. The most important difference is that memory is shared between threads but not between processes6. That means that communication between processes happens by some kind of message passing, similar to communicating between programs running on different computers. From a program’s perspective, the single process is their whole world; creating new processes means running new programs. Creating new threads, however, is just part of the program’s regular execution.
Because of these distinctions between processes and threads, they feel very different to a programmer. But from the OS’s perspective they are very similar and we’ll discuss their properties as if they were a single concept. We’ll talk about threads, but unless we note otherwise, you should understand that to mean ‘threads or processes’.
The OS is responsible for scheduling threads, which means it decides when threads run and for how long. Most modern computers have multiple cores, so they can run multiple threads at literally the same time. However, it is common to have many more threads than cores, so the OS will run each thread for a small amount of time and then pause it and run a different thread for some time7. When multiple threads are run on a single core in this fashion, it is called interleaving or time-slicing. Since the OS chooses when to pause a thread’s execution, it is called pre-emptive multitasking (multitasking here just means running multiple threads at the same time); the OS pre-empts execution of a thread (or more verbosely, the OS pre-emptively pauses execution. It is pre-emptive because the OS is pausing the thread to make time for another thread, before the first thread would otherwise pause, to ensure that the second thread can execute before it becomes a problem that it can’t).
Let’s look at IO again. What happens when a thread blocks waiting for IO? In a system with threads, then the OS will pause the thread (it’s just going to be waiting in any case) and wake it up again when the IO is complete8. Depending on the scheduling algorithm, it might take some time after the IO completes until the OS wakes up the thread waiting for IO, since the OS might wait for other threads to get some work done. So now things are much more efficient: while one thread waits for IO, another thread (or more likely, many threads due to multitasking) can make progress. But, from the perspective of the thread doing IO, things are still sequential - it waits for the IO to finish before starting the next operation.
A thread can also choose to pause itself by calling a sleep function, usually with a timeout. In this case the OS pauses the thread at the threads own request. Similar to pausing due to pre-emption or IO, the OS will wake the thread up again later (after the timeout) to continue execution.
When an OS pauses one thread and starts another (for any reason), it is called context switching. The context being switched includes the registers, operating system records, and the contents of many caches. That’s a non-trivial amount of work. Together with the transfer of control to the OS and back to a thread, and the costs of working with stale caches, context switching is an expensive operation.
Finally, note that some hardware or OSs do not support processes or threads, this is more likely in the embedded world.
Async programming
Async programming is a kind of concurrency with the same high-level goals as concurrency with threads (do many things at the same time), but a different implementation. The two big differences between async concurrency and concurrency with threads, is that async concurrency is managed entirely within the program with no help from the OS9, and that multitasking is cooperative rather than pre-emptive10 (we’ll explain that in a minute). There are many different models of async concurrency, we’ll compare them later on in the guide, but for now we’ll focus only on Rust’s model.
To distinguish them from threads, we’ll call a sequence of executions in async concurrency a task (they’re also called green threads, but this sometimes has connotations of pre-emptive scheduling and implementation details like one stack per task). The way a task is executed, scheduled, and represented in memory is very different to a thread, but for a high-level intuition, it can be useful to think of tasks as just like threads, but managed entirely within the program, rather than by the OS.
In an async system, there is still a scheduler which decides which task to run next (it’s part of the program, not part of the OS). However, the scheduler cannot pre-empt a task. Instead a task must voluntarily give up control and allow another task to be scheduled. Because tasks must cooperate (by giving up control), this is called cooperative multitasking.
Using cooperative rather than pre-emptive multitasking has many implications:
between points where control might be yielded, you can guarantee that code will be executed sequentially - you’ll never be unexpectedly paused,
if a task takes a long time between yield points (e.g., by doing blocking IO or performing long-running computation), other tasks will not be able to make progress,
implementing a scheduler is much simpler and scheduling (and context switching) has fewer overheads.
Async concurrency is much more efficient than concurrency with threads. The memory overheads are much lower and context switching is a much cheaper operation - it doesn’t require handing control to the OS and back to the program and there is much less data to switch. However, there can still be some cache effects - although the OS’s caches such as the TLB don’t need to be changed, tasks are likely to operate on different parts of memory, so data required by the newly scheduled task may not be in a memory cache.
Asynchronous IO is an alternative to blocking IO (it’s sometimes called non-blocking IO). Async IO is not directly tied to async concurrency, but the two are often used together. In async IO, a program initiates IO with one system call and then can either check or be notified when the IO completes. That means the program is free to get other work done while the IO takes place. In Rust, the mechanics of async IO are handled by the async runtime (the scheduler is also part of the runtime, we’ll discuss runtimes in more detail later in this book, but essentially the runtime is just a library which takes care of some of the fundamental async stuff).
From the perspective of the whole system, blocking IO in a concurrent system with threads and non-blocking IO in an async concurrent system are similar. In both cases, IO takes time and other work gets done while the IO is happening:
With threads, the thread doing IO requests IO from the OS, the thread is paused by the OS, other threads get work done, and when the IO is done, the OS wakes up the thread so it can continue execution with the result of the IO.
With async, the task doing IO requests IO from the runtime, the runtime requests IO from the OS but the OS returns control to the runtime. The runtime pauses the IO task and schedules other tasks to get work done. When the IO is done, the runtime wakes up the IO task so it can continue execution with the result of the IO.
The advantage of using async IO, is that the overheads are much lower so a system can support orders of magnitude more tasks than threads. That makes async concurrency particularly well-suited for tasks with lots of users which spend a lot of time waiting for IO (if they don’t spend a lot of time waiting and instead do lots of CPU-bound work, then there is not so much advantage to the low-overheads because the bottleneck will be CPU and memory resources).
Threads and async are not mutually exclusive: many programs use both. Some programs have parts which are better implemented using threads and parts which are better implemented using async. For example, a database server may use async techniques to manage network communication with clients, but use OS threads for computation on data. Alternatively, a program may be written only using async concurrency, but the runtime will execute tasks on multiple threads. This is necessary for a program to make use of multiple CPU cores. We’ll cover the intersection of threads and async tasks in a number of places later in the book.
Concurrency and Parallelism
So far we’ve been talking about concurrency (doing, or appearing to do, many things at the same time), and we’ve hinted at parallelism (the presence of multiple CPU cores which facilitates literally doing many things at the same time). These terms are sometimes used interchangeably, but they are distinct concepts. In this section, we’ll try to precisely define these terms and the difference between them. I’ll use simple pseudo-code to illustrate things.
Imagine a single task broken into a bunch of sub-tasks:
task1 {
subTask1-1()
subTask1-2()
...
subTask1-100()
}
Let’s pretend to be a processor which executes such pseudocode. The obvious way to do so is to first do subTask1-1 then do subTask1-2 and so on until we’ve completed all sub-tasks. This is sequential execution.
Now consider multiple tasks. How might we execute them? We might start one task, do all the sub-tasks until the whole task is complete, then start on the next. The two tasks are being executed sequentially (and the sub-tasks within each task are also being executed sequentially). Looking at just the sub-tasks, you’d execute them like this:
subTask1-1()
subTask1-2()
...
subTask1-100()
subTask2-1()
subTask2-2()
...
subTask2-100()
Alternatively, you could do subTask1, then put task1 aside (remembering how far you got) and pick up the next task and do the first sub-task from that one, then go back to task1 to do a sub-task. The two tasks would be interleaved, we call this concurrent execution of the two tasks. It might look like:
subTask1-1()
subTask2-1()
subTask1-2()
subTask2-2()
...
subTask1-100()
subTask2-100()
Unless one task can observe the results or side-effects of a different task, then from the task’s perspective, the sub-tasks are still being executed sequentially.
There’s no reason we have to limit ourselves to two tasks, we could interleave any number and do so in any order.
Note that no matter how much concurrency we add, the whole job takes the same amount of time to complete (in fact it might take longer with more concurrency due to the overheads of context switching between them). However, for a given sub-task, we might get it finished earlier than in the purely sequential execution (for a user, this might feel more responsive).
Now, imagine it’s not just you processing the tasks, you’ve got some processor friends to help you out. You can work on tasks at the same time and get the work done faster! This is parallel execution (which is also concurrent). You might execute the sub-tasks like:
Processor 1           Processor 2
==============        ==============
subTask1-1()          subTask2-1()
subTask1-2()          subTask2-2()
...                   ...
subTask1-100()        subTask2-100()
If there are more than two processors, we can process even more tasks in parallel. We could also do some interleaving of tasks on each processor or sharing of tasks between processors.
In real code, things are a bit more complicated. Some sub-tasks (e.g., IO) don’t require a processor to actively participate, they just need starting and some time later collecting the results. And some sub-tasks might require the results (or side-effects) of a sub-task from a different task in order to make progress (synchronization). Both these scenarios limit the effective ways that tasks can be concurrently executed and that, together with ensuring some concept of fairness, is why scheduling is important.
Enough silly examples, let’s try to define things properly
Concurrency is about ordering of computations and parallelism is about the mode of execution.
Given two computations, we say they are sequential (i.e., not concurrent) if we can observe that one happens before the other, or that they are concurrent if we cannot observe (or alternatively, it does not matter) that one happens before the other.
Two computations happen in parallel if they are literally happening at the same time. We can think of parallelism as a resource: the more parallelism is available, the more computations can happen in a fixed period of time (assuming that computation happens at the same speed). Increasing the concurrency of a system without increasing parallelism can never make it faster (although it can make the system more responsive and it may make it feasible to implement optimizations which would otherwise be impractical).
To restate, two computations may happen one after the other (neither concurrent nor parallel), their execution may be interleaved on a single CPU core (concurrent, but not parallel), or they may be executed at the same time on two cores (concurrent and parallel)11.
Another useful framing12 is that concurrency is a way of organizing code and parallelism is a resource. This is a powerful statement! That concurrency is about organising code rather than executing code is important because from the perspective of the processor, concurrency without parallelism simply doesn’t exist. It’s particularly relevant for async concurrency because that is implemented entirely in user-side code - not only is it ‘just’ about organizing code, but you can easily prove that to yourself by just reading the source code. That parallelism is a resource is also useful because it reminds us that for parallelism and performance, only the number of processor cores is important, not how the code is organized with respect to concurrency (e.g., how many threads there are).
Both threaded and async systems can offer both concurrency and parallelism. In both cases, concurrency is controlled by code (spawning threads or tasks) and parallelism is controlled by the scheduler, which is part of the OS for threads (configured by the OS’s API), and part of the runtime library for async (configured by choice of runtime, how the runtime is implemented, and options that the runtime provides to client code). There is however, a practical difference due to convention and common defaults. In threaded systems, each concurrent thread is executed in parallel using as much parallelism as possible. In async systems, there is no strong default: a system may run all tasks in a single thread, it may assign multiple tasks to a single thread and lock that thread to a core (so groups of tasks execute in parallel, but within a group each task executes concurrently, but never in parallel with other tasks within the group), or tasks may be run in parallel with or without limits. For the first part of this guide, we will use the Tokio runtime which primarily supports the last model. I.e., the behavior regarding parallelism is similar to concurrency with threads. Furthermore, we’ll see features in async Rust which explicitly support concurrency but not parallelism, independent of the runtime.
Summary
There are many models of execution. We described sequential execution, threads and processes, and asynchronous programming.
Threads are an abstraction provided (and scheduled) by the OS. They usually involve pre-emptive multitasking, are parallel by default, and have fairly high overheads of management and context switching.
Asynchronous programming is managed by a user-space runtime. Multi-tasking is cooperative. It has lower overheads than threads, but feels a bit different to programming with threads since it uses different programming primitives (async and await, and futures, rather than first-class threads).
Concurrency and parallelism are different but closely related concepts.
Concurrency is about ordering of computation (operations are concurrent if their order of execution cannot be observed).
Parallelism is about computing on multiple processors (operations are parallel if they are literally happening at the same time).
Both OS threads and async programming provide concurrency and parallelism; async programming can also offer constructs for flexible or fine-grained concurrency which are not part of most operating systems’ threads API.
This isn’t really true: modern compilers and CPUs will reorganize your code and run it any order they like. Sequential statements are likely to overlap in many different ways. However, this should never be observable to the program itself or its users. ↩
This isn’t true either: even when one program is purely sequential, other programs might be running at the same time; more on this in the next section. ↩
IO is an acronym of input/output. It means any communication from the program to the world outside the program. That might be reading or writing to disk or the network, writing to the terminal, getting user input from a keyboard or mouse, or communicating with the OS or another program running in the system. IO is interesting in the context of concurrency because it takes several orders of magnitude longer to happen than nearly any task a program might do internally. That typically means lots of waiting, and that waiting time is an opportunity to do other work. ↩
Exactly when IO is complete is actually rather complicated. From the program’s perspective a single IO call is complete when control is returned from the OS. This usually indicates that data has been sent to some hardware or other program, but it doesn’t necessarily mean that the data has actually been written to disk or displayed to the user, etc. That might require more work in the hardware or periodic flushing of caches, or for another program to read the data. Mostly we don’t need to worry about this, but it’s good to be aware of. ↩
from the user’s perspective, a single program may include multiple processes, but from the OS’s perspective each process is a separate program. ↩
Some OSs do support sharing memory between processes, but using it requires special treatment and most memory is not shared. ↩
Exactly how the OS chooses which thread to run and for how long (and on which core), is a key part of scheduling. There are many options, both high-level strategies and options to configure those strategies. Making good choices here is crucial for good performance, but it is complicated and we won’t dig into it here. ↩
There’s another option which is that the thread can busy wait by just spinning in a loop until the IO is finished. This is not very efficient since other threads won’t get to run and is uncommon in most modern systems. You may come across it in the implementations of locks or in very simple embedded systems. ↩
We’ll start our explanation assuming a program only has a single thread, but expand on that later. There will probably be other processes running on the system, but they don’t really affect how async concurrency works. ↩
There are some programming languages (or even libraries) which have concurrency which is managed within the program (without the OS), but with a pre-emptive scheduler rather than relying on cooperation between threads. Go is a well-known example. These systems don’t require async and await notation, but have other downsides including making interop with other languages or the OS much more difficult, and having a heavyweight runtime. Very early versions of Rust had such a system, but no traces of it remained by 1.0. ↩
Can computation be parallel but not concurrent? Sort of but not really. Imagine two tasks (a and b) which consist of one sub-task each (1 and 2 belonging to a and b, respectively). By the use of synchronisation, we can’t start sub-task 2 until sub-task 1 is complete and task a has to wait for sub-task 2 to complete until it is complete. Now a and b run on different processors. If we look at the tasks as black boxes, we can say they are running in parallel, but in a sense they are not concurrent because their ordering is fully determined. However, if we look at the sub-tasks we can see that they are neither parallel or concurrent. ↩
Which I think is due to Aaron Turon and is reflected in some of the design of Rust’s standard library, e.g., in the available_parallelism function. ↩
## Async and Await
In this chapter we’ll get started doing some async programming in Rust and we’ll introduce the async and await keywords.
async is an annotation on functions (and other items, such as traits, which we’ll get to later); await is an operator used in expressions. But before we jump into those keywords, we need to cover a few core concepts of async programming in Rust, this follows from the discussion in the previous chapter, here we’ll relate things directly to Rust programming.
Rust async concepts
The runtime
Async tasks must be managed and scheduled. There are typically more tasks than cores available so they can’t all be run at once. When one stops executing another must be picked to execute. If a task is waiting on IO or some other event, it should not be scheduled, but when that completes, it should be scheduled. That requires interacting with the OS and managing IO work.
Many programming languages provide a runtime. Commonly, this runtime does a lot more than manage async tasks - it might manage memory (including garbage collection), have a role in exception handling, provide an abstraction layer over the OS, or even be a full virtual machine. Rust is a low-level language and strives towards minimal runtime overhead. The async runtime therefore has a much more limited scope than many other languages’ runtimes. There are also many ways to design and implement an async runtime, so Rust lets you choose one depending on your requirements, rather than providing one. This does mean that getting started with async programming requires an extra step.
As well as running and scheduling tasks, a runtime must interact with the OS to manage async IO. It must also provide timer functionality to tasks (which intersects with IO management). There are no strong rules about how a runtime must be structured, but some terms and division of responsibilities are common:
reactor or event loop or driver (equivalent terms): dispatches IO and timer events, interacts with the OS, and does the lowest-level driving forward of execution,
scheduler: determines when tasks can execute and on which OS threads,
executor or runtime: combines the reactor and scheduler, and is the user-facing API for running async tasks; runtime is also used to mean the whole library of functionality (e.g., everything in the Tokio crate, not just the Tokio executor which is represented by the Runtime type).
As well as the executor as described above, a runtime crate typically includes many utility traits and functions. These might include traits (e.g., AsyncRead) and implementations for IO, functionality for common IO tasks such as networking or accessing the file system, locks, channels, and other synchronisation primitives, utilities for timing, utilities for working with the OS (e.g., signal handling), utility functions for working with futures and streams (async iterators), or monitoring and observation tools. We’ll cover many of those in this guide.
There are many async runtimes to choose from. Some have very different scheduling policies, or are optimised for a specific task or domain. For most of this guide we’ll use the Tokio runtime. It’s a general purpose runtime and is the most popular runtime in the ecosystem. It’s a great choice for getting started and for production work. In some circumstances, you might get better performance or be able to write simpler code with a different runtime. Later in this guide we’ll discuss some of the other available runtimes and why you might choose one or another, or even write your own.
To get up and running as quickly as possible, you need just a little boilerplate. You’ll need to include the Tokio crate as a dependency in your Cargo.toml (just like any other crate):
[dependencies]
tokio = { version = "1", features = ["full"] }
And you’ll use the tokio::main annotation on your main function so that it can be an async function (which is otherwise not permitted in Rust):
#[tokio::main]
async fn main() { ... }
That’s it! You’re ready to write some asynchronous code!
The #[tokio::main] annotation initializes the Tokio runtime and starts an async task for running the code in main. Later in this guide we’ll explain in more detail what that annotation is doing and how to use async code without it (which will give you more flexibility).
Futures-rs and the ecosystem
TODO context and history, what futures-rs is for - was used a lot, probably don’t need it now, overlap with Tokio and other runtimes (sometimes with subtle semantic differences), why you might need it (working with futures directly, esp writing your own, streams, some utils)
Other ecosystem stuff - Yosh’s crates, alt runtimes, experimental stuff, other?
Futures and tasks
The basic unit of async concurrency in Rust is the future. A future is just a regular old Rust object (a struct or enum, usually) which implements the ‘Future’ trait. A future represents a deferred computation. That is, a computation that will be ready at some point in the future.
We’ll talk a lot about futures in this guide, but it’s easiest to get started without worrying too much about them. We’ll mention them quite a bit in the next few sections, but we won’t really define them or use them directly until later. One important aspect of futures is that they can be combined to make new, ‘bigger’ futures (we’ll talk a lot more about how they can be combined later).
I’ve used the term ‘async task’ quite a bit in an informal way in the previous chapter and this one. I’ve used the term to mean a logical sequence of execution; analogous to a thread but managed within a program rather than externally by the OS. It is often useful to think in terms of tasks, however, Rust itself has no concept of a task and the term is used to mean different things! It is confusing! To make it worse, runtimes do have a concept of a task and different runtimes have slightly different concepts of tasks.
From here on in, I’m going to try to be precise about the terminology around tasks. When I use just ‘task’ I mean the abstract concept of a sequence of computation that may occur concurrently with other tasks. I’ll use ‘async task’ to mean exactly the same thing, but in contrast to a task which is implemented as an OS thread. I’ll use ‘runtime’s task’ to mean whatever kind of task a runtime imagines, and ‘tokio task’ (or some other specific runtime) to mean Tokio’s idea of a task.
An async task in Rust is just a future (usually a ‘big’ future made by combining many others). In other words, a task is a future which is executed. However, there are times when a future is ‘executed’ without being a runtime’s task. This kind of a future is intuitively a task but not a runtime’s task. I’ll spell this out more when we get to an example of it.
Async functions
The async keyword is a modifier on function declarations. E.g., we can write pub async fn send_to_server(...). An async function is simply a function declared using the async keyword, and what that means is that it is a function which can be executed asynchronously, in other words the caller can choose not to wait for the function to complete before doing something else.
In more mechanical terms, when an async function is called, the body is not executed as it would be for a regular function. Instead the function body and its arguments are packaged into a future which is returned in lieu of a real result. The caller can then decide what to do with that future (if the caller wants the result ‘straight away’, then it will await the future, see the next section).
Within an async function, code is executed in the usual, sequential way1, being async makes no difference. You can call synchronous functions from async functions, and execution proceeds as usual. One extra thing you can do within an async function is use await to await other async functions (or futures), which may cause yielding of control so that another task can execute.
await
We stated above that a future is a computation that will be ready at some point in the future. To get the result of that computation, we use the await keyword. If the result is ready immediately or can be computed without waiting, then await simply does that computation to produce the result. However, if the result is not ready, then await hands control over to the scheduler so that another task can proceed (this is cooperative multitasking mentioned in the previous chapter).
In Rust, the syntax for using await is some_future.await, i.e., it is a postfix keyword used with the . operator. That means it can be used ergonomically in chains of method calls and field accesses. This is in contrast to languages like Python or JavaScript, where await is a prefix operator placed before an expression, such as await some_function().
To see why postfix await is often more ergonomic, suppose you’re calling an async function that makes a network request and want to access the status code of the response. With the prefix await syntax, you would need to prepend await to fetch(), then wrap the expression in parentheses to propagate errors with ?, and then access the status code, like (await fetch())?.status_code. In postfix syntax, you can write fetch().await?.status_code. This becomes especially helpful in longer chains. E.g., an expression with two prefix awaits looks like (await (await fetch())?.json())?.data, whereas the postfix equivalent is fetch().await?.json().await?.data, which reads more naturally.
Now let’s look at how async and await in practice. Consider the following functions:
#![allow(unused)]
fn main() {
// An async function, but it doesn't need to wait for anything.
async fn add(a: u32, b: u32) -> u32 {
a + b
}
async fn wait_to_add(a: u32, b: u32) -> u32 {
sleep(1000).await;
a + b
}
}
If we call add(15, 3).await then it will return immediately with the result 18. If we call wait_to_add(15, 3).await, we will eventually get the same answer, but while we wait another task will get an opportunity to run.
In this silly example, the call to sleep is a stand-in for doing some long-running task where we have to wait for the result. This is usually an IO operation where the result is data read from an external source or confirmation that writing to an external destination succeeded. Reading looks something like let data = read(...).await?. In this case await will cause the current task to wait while the read happens. The task will resume once reading is completed (other tasks could get some work done while the reading task waits). The result of reading could be data successfully read or an error (handled by the ?).
Note that if we call add or wait_to_add or read without using .await we won’t get any answer!
What?
Calling an async function returns a future, it doesn’t immediately execute the code in the function. Furthermore, a future does not do any work until it is awaited2. This is in contrast to some other languages where an async function returns a future which begins executing immediately.
This is an important point about async programming in Rust. After a while it will be second nature, but it often trips up beginners, especially those who have experience with async programming in other languages.
An important intuition about futures in Rust is that they are inert objects. To get any work done they must be driven forward by an external force (usually an async runtime).
We’ve described await quite operationally (it runs a future, producing a result), but we talked in the previous chapter about async tasks and concurrency, how does await fit into that mental model? First, let’s consider pure sequential code: logically, calling a function simply executes the code in the function (with some assignment of variables). In other words, the current task continues executing the next ‘chunk’ of code which is defined by the function. Similarly, in an async context, calling a non-async function simply continues execution with that function. Calling an async function finds the code to run, but doesn’t run it. await is an operator which continues execution of the current task, or if the current task can’t continue right now, gives another task an opportunity to continue.
await can only be used inside an async context, for now that means inside an async function (we’ll see more kinds of async contexts later). To understand why, remember that await might hand over control to the runtime so that another task can execute. There is only a runtime to hand control to in an async context. For now, you can imagine the runtime like a global variable which is only accessible in async functions, we’ll explain later how it really works.
Finally, for one more perspective on await: we mentioned earlier that futures can be combined together to make ‘bigger’ futures. async functions are one way to define a future, and await is one way to combine futures. Using await on a future combines that future into the future produced by the async function it’s used inside. We’ll talk in more detail about this perspective and other ways to combine futures later.
Some async/await examples
Let’s start by revisiting our ‘hello, world!’ example:
// Define an async function.
async fn say_hello() {
println!("hello, world!");
}
#[tokio::main] // Boilerplate which lets us write `async fn main`, we'll explain it later.
async fn main() {
// Call an async function and await its result.
say_hello().await;
}
You should now recognise the boilerplate around main. It’s for initializing the Tokio runtime and creating an initial task to run the async main function.
say_hello is an async function, when we call it, we have to follow the call with .await to run it as part of the current task. Note that if you remove the .await, then running the program does nothing! Calling say_hello returns a future, but it is never executed so println is never called (the compiler will warn you, at least).
Here’s a slightly more realistic example, taken from the Tokio tutorial.
#[tokio::main]
async fn main() -> Result<()> {
// Open a connection to the mini-redis address.
let mut client = client::connect("127.0.0.1:6379").await?;
// Set the key "hello" with value "world"
client.set("hello", "world".into()).await?;
// Get key "hello"
let result = client.get("hello").await?;
println!("got value from the server; result={:?}", result);
Ok(())
}
The code is a bit more interesting, but we’re essentially doing the same thing - calling async functions and then awaiting to execute the result. This time we’re using ? for error handling - it works just like in synchronous Rust.
For all the talk so far about concurrency, parallelism, and asynchrony, both these examples are 100% sequential. Just calling and awaiting async functions does not introduce any concurrency unless there are other tasks to schedule while the awaiting task is waiting. To prove this to ourselves, lets look at another simple (but contrived) example:
use std::io::{stdout, Write};
use tokio::time::{sleep, Duration};
async fn say_hello() {
print!("hello, ");
// Flush stdout so we see the effect of the above `print` immediately.
stdout().flush().unwrap();
}
async fn say_world() {
println!("world!");
}
#[tokio::main]
async fn main() {
say_hello().await;
// An async sleep function, puts the current task to sleep for 1s.
sleep(Duration::from_millis(1000)).await;
say_world().await;
}
Between printing “hello” and “world”, we put the current task to sleep3 for one second. Observe what happens when we run the program: it prints “hello”, does nothing for one second, then prints “world”. That is because executing a single task is purely sequential. If we had some concurrency, then that one second nap would be an excellent opportunity to get some other work done, like printing “world”. We’ll see how to do that in the next section.
Spawning tasks
We’ve talked about async and await as a way to run code in an async task. And we’ve said that await can put the current task to sleep while it waits for IO or some other event. When that happens, another task can run, but how do those other tasks come about? Just like we use std::thread::spawn to spawn a new task, we can use tokio::spawn to spawn a new async task. Note that spawn is a function of Tokio, the runtime, not from Rust’s standard library, because tasks are purely a runtime concept.
Here’s a tiny example of running an async function on a separate task by using spawn:
use tokio::{spawn, time::{sleep, Duration}};
async fn say_hello() {
// Wait for a while before printing to make it a more interesting race.
sleep(Duration::from_millis(100)).await;
println!("hello");
}
async fn say_world() {
sleep(Duration::from_millis(100)).await;
println!("world!");
}
#[tokio::main]
async fn main() {
spawn(say_hello());
spawn(say_world());
// Wait for a while to give the tasks time to run.
sleep(Duration::from_millis(1000)).await;
}
Similar to the last example, we have two functions printing “hello” and “world!”. But this time we run them concurrently (and in parallel) rather than sequentially. If you run the program a few times you should see the strings printing in both orders - sometimes “hello” first, sometimes “world!” first. A classic concurrent race!
Let’s dive into what is happening here. There are three concepts in play: futures, tasks, and threads. The spawn function takes a future (which remember can be made up of many smaller futures) and runs it as a new Tokio task. Tasks are the concept which the Tokio runtime schedules and manages (not individual futures). Tokio (in its default configuration) is a multi-threaded runtime which means that when we spawn a new task, that task may be run on a different OS thread from the task it was spawned from (it may be run on the same thread, or it may start on one thread and then be moved to another later on).
So, when a future is spawned as a task it runs concurrently with the task it was spawned from and any other tasks. It may also run in parallel to those tasks if it is scheduled on a different thread.
To summarise, when we write two statements following each other in Rust, they are executed sequentially (whether in async code or not). When we write await, that does not change the concurrency of sequential statements. E.g., foo(); bar(); is strictly sequential - foo is called and afterwards, bar is called. That is true whether foo and bar are async functions or not. foo().await; bar().await; is also strictly sequential, foo is fully evaluated and then bar is fully evaluated. In both cases another thread might be interleaved with the sequential execution and in the second case, another async task might be interleaved at the await points, but the two statements are executed sequentially with respect to each other in both cases.
If we use either thread::spawn or tokio::spawn we introduce concurrency and potentially parallelism, in the first case between threads and in the second between tasks.
Later in the guide we’ll see cases where we execute futures concurrently, but never in parallel.
Joining tasks
If we want to get the result of executing a spawned task, then the spawning task can wait for it to finish and use the result, this is called joining the tasks (analogous to joining threads, and the APIs for joining are similar).
When a task is spawned, the spawn function returns a JoinHandle. If you just want the task to do it’s own thing executing, the JoinHandle can be discarded (dropping the JoinHandle does not affect the spawned task). But if you want the spawning task to wait for the spawned task to complete and then use the result, you can await the JoinHandle to do so.
For example, let’s revisit our ‘Hello, world!’ example one more time:
use tokio::{spawn, time::{sleep, Duration}};
async fn say_hello() {
// Wait for a while before printing to make it a more interesting race.
sleep(Duration::from_millis(100)).await;
println!("hello");
}
async fn say_world() {
sleep(Duration::from_millis(100)).await;
println!("world");
}
#[tokio::main]
async fn main() {
let handle1 = spawn(say_hello());
let handle2 = spawn(say_world());
let _ = handle1.await;
let _ = handle2.await;
println!("!");
}
The code is similar to last time, but instead of just calling spawn, we save the returned JoinHandles and later await them. Since we’re waiting for those tasks to complete before we exit the main function, we no longer need the sleep in main.
The two spawned tasks are still executing concurrently. If you run the program a few times you should see both orderings. However, the awaited join handles are a limit on the concurrency: the final exclamation mark (‘!’) will always be printed last (you could experiment with moving println!("!"); relative to the awaits. You’ll probably need to change with the sleep times too to get observable effects).
If we immediately awaited the JoinHandle of the first spawn rather than saved it and later awaited (i.e., written spawn(say_hello()).await;), then we’d have spawned another task to run the ‘hello’ future, but the spawning task would have waited for it to finish before doing anything else. In other words, there is no possible concurrency! You almost never want to do this (because why bother with the spawn? Just write the sequential code).
JoinHandle
We’ll quickly look at JoinHandle in a little more depth. The fact that we can await a JoinHandle is a clue that a JoinHandle is itself a future. spawn is not an async function, it’s a regular function that returns a future (JoinHandle). It does some work (to schedule the task) before returning the future (unlike an async future), which is why we don’t need to await spawn. Awaiting a JoinHandle waits for the spawned task to complete and then returns the result. In the above example, there was no result, we just waited for the task to complete. JoinHandle is a generic type and it’s type parameter is the type returned by the spawned task. In the above example, the type would be JoinHandle<()>, a future that results in a String would produce a JoinHandle with type JoinHandle<String>.
awaiting a JoinHandle returns a Result (which is why we used let _ = ... in the above example, it avoids a warning about an unused Result). If the spawned task completed successfully, then the task’s result will be in the Ok variant. If the task panicked or was aborted (a form of cancellation), then the result will be an Err containing a JoinError docs. If you are not using cancellation via abort in your project, then unwrapping the result of JoinHandle.await is a reasonable approach, since that is effectively propagating a panic from the spawned task to the spawning task.
like any other thread, the thread the async function is running on may be pre-empted by the operating system and paused so another thread can get some work done. However, from the function’s point of view this is not observable without inspecting data which may have been modified by other threads (and which could have been modified by another thread executing in parallel without the current thread being paused). ↩
Or polled, which is a lower-level operation than await and happens behind the scenes when using await. We’ll talk about polling later when we talk about futures in detail. ↩
Note that we’re using an async sleep function here, if we were to use sleep from std we’d put the whole thread to sleep. That wouldn’t make any difference in this toy example but in a real program it would mean other tasks could not be scheduled on that thread during that time. That is very bad. ↩
## More async/await topics
Unit tests
How to unit test async code? The issue is that you can only await from inside an async context, and unit tests in Rust are not async. Luckily, most runtimes provide a convenience attribute for tests similar to the one for async main. Using Tokio, it looks like this:
#![allow(unused)]
fn main() {
#[tokio::test]
async fn test_something() {
// Write a test here, including all the `await`s you like.
}
}
There are many ways to configure the test, see the docs for details.
There are some more advanced topics in testing async code (e.g., testing for race conditions, deadlock, etc.), and we’ll cover some of those later in this guide.
Blocking and cancellation
Blocking and cancellation are important to keep in mind when programming with async Rust. These concepts are not localised to any particular feature or function, but are ubiquitous properties of the system which you must understand to write correct code.
Blocking IO
We say a thread (note we’re talking about OS threads here, not async tasks) is blocked when it can’t make any progress. That’s usually because it is waiting for the OS to complete a task on its behalf (usually I/O). Importantly, while a thread is blocked, the OS knows not to schedule it so that other threads can make progress. This is fine in a multithreaded program because it lets other threads make progress while the blocked thread is waiting. However, in an async program, there are other tasks which should be scheduled on the same OS thread, but the OS doesn’t know about those and keeps the whole thread waiting. This means that rather than the single task waiting for its I/O to complete (which is fine), many tasks have to wait (which is not fine).
We’ll talk soon about non-blocking/async I/O. For now, just know that non-blocking I/O is I/O that the async runtime is aware of, so only the current task waits; the thread itself is not blocked. It is very important to only use non-blocking I/O from an async task, never blocking I/O (which is the only kind provided in Rust’s standard library).
Blocking computation
You can also block the thread by doing computation (this is not quite the same as blocking I/O, since the OS is not involved, but the effect is similar). If you have a long-running computation (with or without blocking I/O) without yielding control to the runtime, then that task will never give the runtime’s scheduler a chance to schedule other tasks. Remember that async programming uses cooperative multitasking. Here a task is not cooperating, so other tasks won’t get a chance to get work done. We’ll discuss ways to mitigate this later.
There are many other ways to block a whole thread, and we’ll come back to blocking several times in this guide.
Cancellation
Cancellation means stopping a future (or task) from executing. Since in Rust (and in contrast to many other async/await systems), futures must be driven forward by an external force (like the async runtime), if a future is no longer driven forward then it will not execute any more. If a future is dropped (remember, a future is just a plain old Rust object), then it can never make any more progress and is canceled.
Cancellation can be initiated in a few ways:
By simply dropping a future (if you own it).
Calling abort on a task’s ‘JoinHandle’ (or an AbortHandle).
Via a CancellationToken (which requires the future being canceled to notice the token and cooperatively cancel itself).
Implicitly, by a function or macro like select.
The middle two are specific to Tokio, though most runtimes provide similar facilities. Using a CancellationToken requires cooperation of the future being canceled, but the others do not. In these other cases, the canceled future will get no notification of cancellation and no opportunity to clean up (besides its destructor). Note that even if a future has a cancellation token, it can still be canceled via the other methods which won’t trigger the cancellation token.
From the perspective of writing async code (in async functions, blocks, futures, etc.), the code might stop executing at any await (including hidden ones in macros) and never start again. In order for your code to be correct (specifically to be cancellation safe), it must work correctly whether it completes normally or whether it terminates at any await point1.
#![allow(unused)]
fn main() {
async fn some_function(input: Option<Input>) {
let Some(input) = input else {
return;           // Might terminate here (`return`).
};
let x = foo(input)?;  // Might terminate here (`?`).
let y = bar(x).await; // Might terminate here (`await`).
// ...
//                       Might terminate here (implicit return).
}
}
An example of how this can go wrong is if an async function reads data into an internal buffer, then awaits the next datum. If reading the data is destructive (i.e., cannot be re-read from the original source) and the async function is canceled, then the internal buffer will be dropped, and the data in it will be lost. It is important to consider how a future and any data it touches will be impacted by canceling the future, restarting the future, or starting a new future which touches the same data.
We’ll be coming back to cancellation and cancellation safety a few times in this guide, and there is a whole chapter on the topic in the reference section.
Async blocks
A regular block ({ ... }) groups code together in the source and creates a scope of encapsulation for names. At runtime, the block is executed in order and evaluates to the value of its last expression (or the unit type (()) if there is no trailing expression).
Similarly to async functions, an async block is a deferred version of a regular block. An async block scopes code and names together, but at runtime it is not immediately executed and evaluates to a future. To execute the block and obtain the result, it must be awaited. E.g.:
#![allow(unused)]
fn main() {
let s1 = {
let a = 42;
format!("The answer is {a}")
};
let s2 = async {
let q = question().await;
format!("The question is {q}")
};
}
If we were to execute this snippet, s1 would be a string which could be printed, but s2 would be a future; question() would not have been called. To print s2, we first have to s2.await.
An async block is the simplest way to start an async context and create a future. It is commonly used to create small futures which are only used in one place.
Unfortunately, control flow with async blocks is a little quirky. Because an async block creates a future rather than straightforwardly executing, it behaves more like a function than a regular block with respect to control flow. break and continue cannot go ‘through’ an async block like they can with regular blocks; instead you have to use return:
#![allow(unused)]
fn main() {
loop {
{
if ... {
// ok
continue;
}
}
async {
if ... {
// not ok
// continue;
// ok - continues with the next execution of the `loop`, though note that if there was
// code in the loop after the async block that would be executed.
return;
}
}.await
}
}
To implement break you would need to test the value of the block (a common idiom is to use ControlFlow for the value of the block, which also allows use of ?).
Likewise, ? inside an async block will terminate execution of the future in the presence of an error, causing the awaited block to take the value of the error, but won’t exit the surrounding function (like ? in a regular block would). You’ll need another ? after await for that:
#![allow(unused)]
fn main() {
async {
let x = foo()?;   // This `?` only exits the async block, not the surrounding function.
consume(x);
Ok(())
}.await?
}
Annoyingly, this often confuses the compiler since (unlike functions) the ‘return’ type of an async block is not explicitly stated. You’ll probably need to add some type annotations on variables or use turbofished types to make this work, e.g., Ok::<_, MyError>(()) instead of Ok(()) in the above example.
A function which returns an async block is pretty similar to an async function. Writing async fn foo() -> ... { ... } is roughly equivalent to fn foo() -> ... { async { ... } }. In fact, from the caller’s perspective they are equivalent, and changing from one form to the other is not a breaking change. Furthermore, you can override one with the other when implementing an async trait (see below). However, you do have to adjust the type, making the Future explicit in the async block version: async fn foo() -> Foo becomes fn foo() -> impl Future<Output = Foo> (you might also need to make other bounds explicit, e.g., Send and 'static).
You would usually prefer the async function version since it is simpler and clearer. However, the async block version is more flexible since you can execute some code when the function is called (by writing it outside the async block) and some code when the result is awaited (the code inside the async block).
Async closures
closures
coming soon (https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/132706, https://blog.rust-lang.org/inside-rust/2024/08/09/async-closures-call-for-testing.html)
async blocks in closures vs async closures
Lifetimes and borrowing
Mentioned the static lifetime above
Lifetime bounds on futures (Future + '_, etc.)
Borrowing across await points
I don’t know, I’m sure there are more lifetime issues with async functions …
Send + 'static bounds on futures
Why they’re there, multi-threaded runtimes
spawn local to avoid them
What makes an async fn Send + 'static and how to fix bugs with it
Async traits
syntax
The Send + 'static issue and working around it
trait_variant
explicit future
return type notation (https://blog.rust-lang.org/inside-rust/2024/09/26/rtn-call-for-testing.html)
overriding
future vs async notation for methods
object safety
capture rules (https://blog.rust-lang.org/2024/09/05/impl-trait-capture-rules.html)
history and async-trait crate
Recursion
Allowed (relatively new), but requires some explicit boxing
forward reference to futures, pinning
https://rust-lang.github.io/async-book/07_workarounds/04_recursion.html
https://blog.rust-lang.org/2024/03/21/Rust-1.77.0.html#support-for-recursion-in-async-fn
async-recursion macro (https://docs.rs/async-recursion/latest/async_recursion/)
It is interesting to compare cancellation in async programming with canceling threads. Canceling a thread is possible (e.g., using pthread_cancel in C, there is no direct way to do this in Rust), but it is almost always a very, very bad idea since the thread being canceled can terminate anywhere. In contrast, canceling an async task can only happen at an await point. As a consequence, it is very rare to cancel an OS thread without terminating the whole process and so as a programmer, you generally don’t worry about this happening. In async Rust however, cancellation is definitely something which can happen. We’ll be discussing how to deal with that as we go along. ↩
## IO and issues with blocking
Efficiently handling IO (input/output) is one of the primary motivators for async programming and most async programs do lots of IO. At it’s root, the issue with IO is that it takes orders of magnitude more time than computation, therefore just waiting for IO to complete rather than getting on with other work is incredibly inefficient. Ideally, async programming lets a program get on with other work while waiting for IO.
This chapter is an introduction to IO in the async context. We’ll cover the important difference between blocking and non-blocking IO, and why blocking IO and async programming don’t mix (at least not without a bit of thought and effort). We’ll cover how to use non-blocking IO, then look at some of the issues which can crop up with IO and async programming. We’ll also look at how the OS handles IO and have a sneak peek at some alternative IO methods like io_uring.
We’ll finish by covering some other ways of blocking an async task (which is bad) and how to properly mix async programming with blocking IO or long-running, CPU-intensive code.
Blocking and non-blocking IO
IO is implemented by the operating system; the work of IO takes place in separate processes and/or in dedicated hardware, in either case outside of the program’s process. IO can be either synchronous or asynchronous (aka blocking and non-blocking, respectively). Synchronous IO means that the program (or at least the thread) waits (aka blocks) while the IO takes place and doesn’t start processing until the IO is complete and the result is received from the OS. Asynchronous IO means that the program can continue to make progress while the IO takes place and can pick up the result later. There are many different OS APIs for both kinds of IO, though more variety in the asynchronous space.
Asynchronous IO and asynchronous programming are not intrinsically linked. However, async programming facilitates ergonomic and performant async IO, and that is a major motivation for async programming. Blocking due to synchronous IO is a major source of performance issues with async programming, and we must be careful to avoid it (more on this below).
Rust’s standard library includes functions and traits for blocking IO. For non-blocking IO, you must use specialized libraries, which are often part of the async runtime, e.g., Tokio’s io module.
Let’s quickly look at an example (adapted from the Tokio docs):
#![allow(unused)]
fn main() {
use tokio::{io::AsyncWriteExt, net::TcpStream};
async fn write_hello() -> Result<(), Box<dyn std::error::Error>> {
let mut stream = TcpStream::connect("127.0.0.1:8080").await?;
stream.write_all(b"hello world!").await?;
Ok(())
}
}
write_all is an async IO method which writes data to stream. This might complete immediately, but more likely this will take some time to complete, so stream.write_all(...).await will cause the current task to be paused while it waits for the OS to handle the write. The scheduler will run other tasks and when the write is complete, it will wake up the task and schedule it to continue working.
However, if we used a write function from the standard library, the async scheduler would not be involved and the OS would pause the whole thread while the IO completes, meaning that not only is the current task paused but no other task can be executed using that thread. If this happens to all threads in the runtime’s thread pool (which in some circumstances can be just one thread), then the whole program stops and cannot make progress. This is called blocking the thread (or program) and is very bad for performance. It is important to never block threads in an async program, and thus you should avoid using blocking IO in an async task.
Blocking a thread can be caused by long-running tasks or tasks waiting for locks, as well as by blocking IO. We’ll discuss this more at the end of this chapter.
It is a common pattern to repeatedly read or write, and streams and sinks (aka async iterators) are a convenient mechanism for doing so. They’re covered in a dedicated chapter.
Reading and writing
TODO
async Read and Write traits
part of the runtime
how to use
specific implementations
network vs disk
tcp, udp
file system is not really async, but io_uring (ref to that chapter)
practical examples
stdout, etc.
pipe, fd, etc.
Memory management
When we read data we need to put it somewhere and when we write data it needs to be kept somewhere until the write completes. In either case, how that memory is mangaged is important.
TODO
Issues with buffer management and async IO
Different solutions and pros and cons
zero-copy approach
shared buffer approach
Utility crates to help with this, Bytes, etc.
Advanced topics on IO
TODO
buf read/write
Read + Write, split, join
copy
simplex and duplex
cancelation
what if we have to do sync IO? Spawn a thread or use spawn_blocking (see below)
The OS view of IO
TODO
Different kinds of IO and mechanisms, completion IO, reference to completion IO chapter in adv section
different runtimes can faciliate this
mio for low-level interface
Other blocking operations
As mentioned at the start of the chapter, not blocking threads is crucial for the performance of async programs. Blocking IO of different kinds is a common way to block, but it is also possible to block by doing lots of computation or waiting in a way which the async scheduler isn’t coordinating.
Waiting is most often caused by using non-async aware synchronisation mechanisms, for example, using std::sync::Mutex rather than an async mutex, or waiting for a non-async channel. We’ll discuss this issue in the chapter on Channels, locking, and synchronization. There are other ways that you might wait in a blocking way, and in general you need to find a non-blocking or otherwise async-friendly mechanism, e.g., using an async sleep function rather than the std one. Waiting could also be a busy wait (effectively just looping without doing any work, aka a spin lock), you should probably just avoid that.
CPU-intensive work
Doing long-running (i.e., cpu-intensive or cpu-bound) work will prevent the scheduler from running other tasks. This is a kind of blocking, but it is not as bad as blocking on IO or waiting because at least your program is making some progress. However (without care and consideration), it is likely to be sub-optimal for performance by some measure (e.g., tail latency) and perhaps a correctness issue if the tasks that can’t run needed to be run at a particular time. There is a meme that you should simply not use async Rust (or general purpose async runtimes like Tokio) for CPU-intensive work, but that is an over-simplification. What is correct is that you cannot mix IO- and CPU-bound (or more precisely, long-running and latency-sensitive) tasks without some special handling and expect to have a good time.
For the rest of this section, we’ll assume you have a mix of latency-sensitive tasks and long-running, CPU-intensive tasks. If you don’t have anything which is latency-sensitive, then things are a bit different (mostly easier).
There are essentially three solutions for running long-running or blocking tasks: use a runtime’s built-in facilities, use a separate thread, or use a separate runtime.
In Tokio, you can use spawn_blocking to spawn a task which might block. This works like spawn for spawning a task, but runs the task in a separate thread pool which is optimized for tasks which might block (the task will likely run on it’s own thread). Note that this runs regular synchronous code, not an async task. That means that the task can’t be cancelled (even though its JoinHandle has an abort method). Other runtimes provide similar functionality.
This example uses spawn_blocking to perform blocking I/O by calling a synchronous filesystem function from the standard library. Note that tokio::fs also exists and provides asynchronous filesystem APIs; however, under the hood it too uses blocking operations wrapped in spawn_blocking.
use tokio;
#[tokio::main]
async fn main() {
let contents = tokio::task::spawn_blocking(|| {
std::fs::read_to_string("file.txt").unwrap()
})
.await
.unwrap();
// do something with contents
}
Because tasks spawned with spawn_blocking cannot be aborted, it is intended for work that eventually completes. Tasks that may block indefinitely, such as a server listening for incoming requests, are better run on a dedicated thread so they do not occupy a thread from Tokio’s blocking thread pool for an extended period. You can create one with std::thread::spawn or a similar API.
If you need to run a lot of tasks, you’ll probably need some kind of thread pool or work scheduler. If you keep spawning threads and have many more than there are cores available, you’ll end up sacrificing throughput. Rayon is a popular choice which makes it easy to run and manage parallel tasks. You might get better performance with something which is more specific to your workload and/or has some knowledge of the tasks being run.
Here is an example of using Rayon together with Tokio. It utilizes tokio::oneshot::channel to communicate results between a task spawned by Rayon and the current task in Tokio.
use rayon::prelude::*;
#[tokio::main]
async fn main() {
let data = 1..=10;
let (send, recv) = tokio::sync::oneshot::channel();
// Spawn a task on rayon to avoid blocking the current task
std::thread::spawn(move || {
// Use rayon's parallel iterators to compute the results in parallel
let results = data.into_par_iter().map(compute).collect::<Vec<_>>();
// Send the result back to Tokio.
send.send(results).unwrap();
});
// Wait for the rayon task and get the results
let results = recv.await.unwrap();
println!("Results: {:?}", results);
}
fn compute(input: u64) -> u64 {
// Simulate a CPU-intensive computation by
// summing up a large number of integers.
let mut sum = 0u64;
for i in 0..100_000_000 {
sum = sum.wrapping_add(i * i);
}
sum % input
}
You can use a separate instance of the async runtime for latency-sensitive tasks and for long-running tasks. This is suitable for CPU-bound tasks, but you still shouldn’t use blocking IO, even on the runtime for long-running tasks. For CPU-bound tasks, this is a good solution in that it is the only one which supports the long-running tasks be async tasks. It is also flexible (since the runtimes can be configured to be optimal for the kind of task they’re running; indeed, it is necessary to put some effort into runtime configuration to get optimal performance) and lets you benefit from using mature, well-engineered sub-systems like Tokio. You can even use two different async runtimes. In any case, the runtimes must be run on different threads.
On the other hand, you do need to do a bit more thinking: you must ensure that you are running tasks on the right runtime (which can be harder than it sounds) and communication between tasks can be complicated. We’ll discuss synchronisation between sync and async contexts next, but it can be even trickier between multiple async runtimes. Each runtime is it’s own little universe of tasks and the schedulers are totally independent. Tokio channels and locks can be used from different runtimes (even non-Tokio ones), but other runtimes’ primitives may not work in this way.
Since the scheduler in each runtime is oblivious of other runtimes (and the OS is oblivious to any async schedulers), there is no coordination or shared prioritisation of scheduling and work cannot be stolen between runtimes. Therefore, scheduling of tasks can be sub-optimal (especially if the runtimes are not well-tuned to their workloads). Furthermore, since all scheduling is cooperative, long-running tasks can still be starved of resources and latency can suffer. See the next section for how long-running tasks can be made to be more cooperative.
As a pure scheduler, using Tokio for CPU work is likely to have slightly higher overheads than a dedicated, synchronous worker pool. This is not surprising when one considers the extra work required to support async programming. This is unlikely to be a problem in practice for most users, but might be worth considering if your code is extremely performance sensitive.
For any of the above solutions, you will have tasks running in different contexts (sync and async, or different async runtimes). If you need to communicate between tasks, then you need to take care that you are using the correct combinations of sync and async primitives (channels, mutexes, etc.) and the correct (blocking or non-blocking) methods on those primitives. For mutexes and similar locks, you should probably use the async versions if you need to hold the lock across an await point or protect an IO resource (it should be usable from sync contexts by using a blocking lock method), or a synchronous version to protect data or where the lock does not need to be held across an await point. Tokio’s async channels can be used from sync context with blocking methods, but see these docs for some detail on when to use sync or async channels.
So, which of the above solutions should you use?
If you’re doing blocking IO, you should probably use spawn_blocking. You cannot use a second runtime or other thread pool (at least if you need optimal performance).
If you have a thread that will run forever, you should use std::thread::spawn rather than use any kind of thread pool (since it will use up one of the pool’s threads).
If you’re doing lots of CPU work, then you should use a thread pool, either a specialised one or a second async runtime.
If you need to run long-running async code, then you should use a second runtime.
You might choose to use a dedicated thread or spawn_blocking because it is easy and has satisfactory performance, even though a more complex solution is more optimal.
Yielding
Long-running code is an issue because it doesn’t give the scheduler an opportunity to schedule other tasks. Async concurrency is cooperative: the scheduler cannot pre-empt a task to run a different one. If a long-running task doesn’t yield to the scheduler, then the scheduler cannot stop it. However, if the long-running code does yield to the scheduler, then other tasks can be scheduled and the fact that a task is long-running is not an issue. This can be used as an alternative to using another thread for CPU-intensive work or for CPU-intensive work on it’s own runtime to (possibly) improve performance.
Yielding is easy, simply call the runtime’s yield function. In Tokio that is yield_now. Note that this is different to both the standard library’s yield_now and the yield keyword for yielding from a coroutine. Calling yield_now won’t yield to the scheduler if the current future is being run inside a select or join (see the chapter on composing futures concurrently); that may or may not be what you want to happen.
Knowing when you need to yield is a bit more tricky. First of all you need to know if your program is implicitly yielding. This can only happen at an .await, so if you’re not awaiting, then you’re not yielding. But await doesn’t automatically yield to the scheduler. That only happens if the leaf future being awaited is pending (not ready) or there is an explicit yield somewhere in the call stack. Tokio and most async runtimes will do this in their IO and synchronization functions, but in general you can’t know whether an await will yield without debugging or inspecting the source code.
A good rule of thumb is that code should not run for more than 10-100 microseconds without hitting a potential yield point.
References
Tokio docs on CPU-bound tasks and blocking code
Blog post: What is Blocking?
Blog post: Using Rustlang’s Async Tokio Runtime for CPU-Bound Tasks
## Composing futures concurrently
In this chapter we’re going to cover more ways in which futures can be composed. In particular, some new ways in which futures can be executed concurrently (but not in parallel). Superficially, the new functions/macros we introduce in this chapter are pretty simple. However, the underlying concepts can be pretty subtle. We’ll start with a recap on futures, concurrency, and parallelism, but you might also want to revisit the earlier section comparing concurrency with parallelism.
A futures is a deferred computation. A future can be progressed by using await, which hands over control to the runtime, causing the current task to wait for the result of the computation. If a and b are futures, then they can be sequentially composed (that is, combined to make a future which executes a to completion and then b to completion) by awaiting one then the other: async { a.await; b.await}.
We have also seen parallel composition of futures using spawn: async { let a = spawn(a); let b = spawn(b); (a.await, b.await)} runs the two futures in parallel. Note that the awaits in the tuple are not awaiting the futures themselves, but are awaiting JoinHandles to get the results of the futures when they complete.
In this chapter we introduce two ways to compose futures concurrently without parallelism: join and select/race. In both cases, the futures run concurrently by time-slicing; each of the composed futures takes turns to execute then the next gets a turn. This is done without involving the async runtime (and therefore without multiple OS threads and without any potential for parallelism). The composing construct interleaves the futures locally. You can think of these constructs being like mini-executors which execute their component futures within a single async task.
The fundamental difference between join and select/race is how they handle futures completing their work: a join finishes when all futures finish, a select/race finishes when one future finishes (all the others are cancelled). There are also variations of both for handling errors.
These constructs (or similar concepts) are often used with streams, we’ll touch on this below, but we’ll talk more about that in the streams chapter.
If you want parallelism (or you don’t explicitly not want parallelism), spawning tasks is often a simpler alternative to these composition constructs. Spawning tasks is usually less error-prone, more general, and performance is more predictable. On the other hand, spawning is inherently less structured, which can make lifecycle and resource management harder to reason about.
It’s worth considering the performance issue in a little more depth. The potential performance problem with concurrent composition is the fairness of time sharing. If you have 100 tasks in your program, then typically the optimal way to share resources is for each task to get 1% of the processor time (or if the tasks are all waiting, then for each to have the same chance of being woken up). If you spawn 100 tasks, then this is usually what happens (roughly). However, if you spawn two tasks and join 99 futures on one of those tasks, then the scheduler will only know about two tasks and one task will get 50% of the time and the 99 futures will each get 0.5%.
Usually the distribution of tasks is not so biased, and very often we use join/select/etc. for things like timeouts where this behaviour is actually desirable. But it is worth considering to ensure that your program has the performance characteristics you want.
Join
Tokio’s join macro takes a list of futures and runs them all to completion concurrently (returning all the results as a tuple). It returns when all the futures have completed. The futures are always executed on the same thread (concurrently and not in parallel).
Here’s a simple example:
async fn main() {
let (result_1, result_2) = join!(do_a_thing(), do_a_thing());
// Use `result_1` and `result_2`.
}
Here, the two executions of do_a_thing happen concurrently, and the results are ready when they are both done. Notice that we don’t await to get the results. join! implicitly awaits its futures and produces a value. It does not create a future. You do still need to use it within an async context (e.g., from within an async function).
Although you can’t see it in the example above, join! takes expressions which evaluate to futures1. join does not create an async context in it’s body and you shouldn’t await the futures passed to join (otherwise they’ll be evaluated before the joined futures).
Because all the futures are executed on the same thread, if any future blocks the thread, then none of them can make progress. If using a mutex or other lock, this can easily lead to deadlock if one future is waiting for a lock held by another future.
join does not care about the result of the futures. In particular, if a future is cancelled or returns an error, it does not affect the others - they continue to execute. If you want ‘fail fast’ behaviour, use try_join. try_join works similarly to join, however, if any future returns an Err, then all the other futures are cancelled and try_join returns the error immediately.
Back in the earlier chapter on async/await, we used the word ‘join’ to talk about joining spawned tasks. As the name suggests, joining futures and tasks is related: joining means we execute multiple futures concurrently and wait for the result before continuing. The syntax is different: using a JoinHandle vs the join macro, but the idea is similar. The key difference is that when joining tasks, the tasks execute concurrently and in parallel, whereas using join!, the futures execute concurrently but not in parallel. Furthermore, spawned tasks are scheduled on the runtime’s scheduler, whereas with join! the futures are ‘scheduled’ locally (on the same task and within the temporal scope of the macro’s execution). Another difference is that if a spawned task panics, the panic is caught by the runtime, but if a future in join panics, then the whole task panics.
Alternatives
Running futures concurrently and collecting their results is a common requirement. You should probably use spawn and JoinHandles unless you have a good reason not to (i.e., you explicitly do not want parallelism, and even then you might prefer to use spawn_local). The JoinSet abstraction manages such spawned tasks in a way similar to join!.
Most runtimes (and futures.rs) have an equivalent to Tokio’s join macro and they mostly behave the same way. There are also join functions, which are similar to the macro but a little less flexible. E.g., futures.rs has join for joining two futures, join3, join4, and join5 for joining the obvious number of futures, and join_all for joining a collection of futures (as well as try_ variations of each of these).
Futures-concurrency also provides functionality for join (and try_join). In the futures-concurrency style, these operations are trait methods on groups of futures such as tuples, Vecs, or arrays. E.g., to join two futures, you would write (fut1, fut2).join().await (note that await is explicit here).
If the set of futures you wish to join together varies dynamically (e.g., new futures are created as input comes in over the network), or you want the results as they complete rather than when all the futures have completed, then you’ll need to use streams and the FuturesUnordered or FuturesOrdered functionality. We’ll cover these in the streams chapter.
Race/select
The counterpart to joining futures is racing them (aka selecting on them). With race/select the futures are executed concurrently, but rather than waiting for all the futures to complete, we only wait for the first one to complete and then cancel the others. Although this sounds similar to joining, it is significantly more interesting (and sometimes error-prone) because now we have to reason about cancellation.
Here’s an example using Tokio’s select macro:
async fn main() {
select! {
result = do_a_thing() => {
println!("computation completed and returned {result}");
}
_ = timeout() => {
println!("computation timed-out");
}
}
}
You’ll notice things are already more interesting than with the join macro because we handle the results of the futures within the select macro. It looks a bit like a match expression, but with select, all branches are run concurrently and the body of the branch which finishes first is executed with its result (the other branches are not executed and the futures are cancelled by dropping). In the example, do_a_thing and timeout execute concurrently and the first to complete will have it’s block executed (i.e., only one println will run), the other future will be cancelled. As with the join macro, awaiting the futures is implicit.
Tokio’s select macro supports a bunch of features:
pattern matching: the syntax on the left of = on each branch can be a pattern and the block is only executed if the result of the future matches the pattern. If the pattern does not match, then the future is no longer polled (but other futures are). This can be useful for futures which optionally return a value, e.g., Some(x) = do_a_thing() => { ... }.
if guards: each branch may have an if guard. When the select macro runs, after evaluating each expression to produce a future, the if guard is evaluated and the future is only polled if the guard is true. E.g., x = = do_a_thing() if false => { ... } will never be polled. Note that the if guard is not re-evaluated during polling, only when the macro is initialized.
else branch: select can have an else branch else => { ... }, this is executed if all the futures have stopped and none of the blocks have been executed. If this happens without an else branch, then select will panic.
The value of the select! macro is the value of the executed branch (just like match), so all branches must have the same type. E.g., if we wanted to use the result of the above example outside of the select, we’d write it like
async fn main() {
let result = select! {
result = do_a_thing() => {
Some(result)
}
_ = timeout() => {
None
}
};
// Use `result`
}
As with join!, select! does not treat Results in any special way (other than the pattern matching mentioned previously) and if a branch completes with an error, then all other branches will be cancelled and the error will be used as the result of select (in the same way as if the branch has completed successfully).
The select macro intrinsically uses cancellation, so if you’re trying to avoid cancellation in your program, you must avoid select!. In fact, select is often the primary source of cancellation in an async program. As discussed elsewhere, cancellation has many subtle issues which can lead to bugs. In particular, note that select cancels futures by simply dropping them. This will not notify the future being dropped or trigger any cancellation tokens, etc.
select! is often used in a loop to handle streams or other sequences of futures. This adds an extra layer of complexity and opportunities for bugs. In the simple case that we create a new, independent future on each iteration of the loop, things are not much more complicated. However, this is rarely what is needed. Generally we want to preserve some state between iterations. It is common to use select in a loop with streams, where each iteration of the loop handles one result from the stream. E.g.:
async fn main() {
let mut stream = ...;
loop {
select! {
result = stream.next() => {
match result {
Some(x) => println!("received: {x}"),
None => break,
}
}
_ = timeout() => {
println!("time out!");
break;
}
}
}
}
In this example, we read values from stream and print them until there are none left or waiting for a result times out. What happens to any remaining data in the stream in the timeout case depends on the implementation of the stream (it might be lost! Or duplicated!). This is an example of why behaviour in the face of cancellation can be important (and tricky).
We may want to reuse a future, not just a stream, across iterations. For example, we may want to race against a timeout future where the timeout applies to all iterations rather than applying a new timeout for each iteration. This is possible by creating the future outside of the loop and referencing it:
async fn main() {
let mut stream = ...;
let mut timeout = timeout();
loop {
select! {
result = stream.next() => {
match result {
Some(x) => println!("received: {x}"),
None => break,
}
}
// Create a reference to `timeout` rather than moving it.
_ = &mut timeout => {
println!("time out!");
break;
}
}
}
}
There are a couple of important details when using select! in a loop with futures or streams created outside of the select!. These are a fundamental consequence of how select works, so I’ll introduce them by stepping through the details of select, using timeout in the last example as an example.
timeout is created outside of the loop and initialised with some time to count down.
On each iteration of the loop, select creates a reference to timeout, but does not change its state.
As select executes, it polls timeout which will return Pending while there is time left and Ready when the time elapses, at which point its block is executed.
In the above example, when timeout is ready, we break out of the loop. But what if we didn’t do that? In that case, select would simply poll timeout again, which the Future docs say should not happen! select can’t help this, it doesn’t have any state (between iterations) to decide if timeout should be polled. Depending on how timeout is written, this might cause a panic, a logic error, or some kind of crash.
You can prevent this kind of bug in several ways:
Use a fused future or stream so that re-polling is safe.
Ensure that your code is structured so that futures are never re-polled, e.g., by breaking out of the loop (as in the previous example), or by using an if guard.
Now, lets consider the type of &mut timeout. Lets assume that timeout() returns a type which implements Future, which might be an anonymous type from an async function, or it might be a named type like Timeout. Lets assume the latter because it makes the examples easier (but the logic applies in either case). Given that Timeout implents Future, will &mut Timeout implement Future? Not necessarily! There is a blanket impl which makes this true, but only if Timeout implements Unpin. That is not the case for all futures, so often you’ll get a type error writing code like the last example. Such an error is easily fixed though by using the pin macro, e.g., let mut timeout = pin!(timeout());
Cancellation with select in a loop is a rich source of subtle bugs. These usually happen where a future contains some state involving some data but not the data itself. When the future is dropped by cancellation, that state is lost but the underlying data is not updated. This can lead to data being lost or processed multiple times.
Alternatives
Futures.rs has its own select macro and futures-concurrency has a Race trait which are alternatives to Tokio’s select macro. These both have the same core semantics of concurrently racing multiple futures, processing the result of the first and cancelling the others, but they have different syntax and vary in the details.
Futures.rs’ select is superficially similar to Tokio’s; to summarize the differences, in the futures.rs version:
Futures must always be fused (enforced by type-checking).
select has default and complete branches, rather than an else branch.
select does not support if guards.
Futures-concurrency’s Race has a very different syntax, similar to it’s version of join, e.g., (future_a, future_b).race().await (it works on Vecs and arrays as well as tuples). The syntax is less flexible than the macros, but fits in nicely with most async code. Note that if you use race within a loop, you can still have the same issues as with select.
As with join, spawning tasks and letting them execute in parallel is often a good alternative to using select. However, cancelling the remaining tasks after the first completes requires some extra work. This can be done using channels or a cancellation token. In either case, cancellation requires some action by the task being cancelled which means the task can do some tidying up or other graceful shutdown.
A common use for select (especially inside a loop) is working with streams. There are stream combinator methods which can replace some uses of select. For example, merge in futures-concurrency is a good alternative to merge multiple streams together.
Final words
In this section we’ve talked about two ways to run groups of futures concurrently. Joining futures means waiting for them all to finish; selecting (aka racing) futures means waiting for the first to finish. In contrast to spawning tasks, these compositions make no use of parallelism.
Both join and select operate on sets of futures which are known in advance (often when writing the program, rather than at runtime). Sometimes, the futures to be composed are not known in advance - futures must be added to the set of composed futures as they are being executed. For this we need streams which have their own composition operations.
It’s worth reiterating that although these composition operators are powerful and expressive, it is often easier and more appropriate to use tasks and spawning: parallelism is often desirable, you’re less likely to have bugs around cancellation or blocking, and resource allocation is usually fairer (or at least simpler) and more predictable.
The expressions must have a type which implements IntoFuture. The expression is evaluated and converted to a future by the macro. I.e., they don’t actually have to evaluate to a future, but rather something which can be converted into a future, but this is a pretty minor distinction. The expressions themselves are evaluated sequentially before any of the resulting futures are executed. ↩
## Channels, locking, and synchronization
note on runtime specificness of sync primitves
Why we need async primitives rather than use the sync ones
Channels
basically same as the std ones, but await
communicate between tasks (same thread or different)
one shot
mpsc
other channels
bounded and unbounded channels
Locks
async Mutex
c.f., std::Mutex - can be held across await points (borrowing the mutex in the guard, guard is Send, scheduler-aware? or just because lock is async?), lock is async (will not block the thread waiting for lock to be available)
even a clippy lint for holding the guard across await (https://rust-lang.github.io/rust-clippy/master/index.html#await_holding_lock)
more expensive because it can be held across await
use std::Mutex if you can
can use try_lock or mutex is expected to not be under contention
lock is not magically dropped when yield (that’s kind of the point of a lock!)
deadlock by holding mutex over await
tasks deadlocked, but other tasks can make progress so might not look like a deadlock in process stats/tools/OS
usual advice - limit scope, minimise locks, order locks, prefer alternatives
no mutex poisoning
lock_owned
blocking_lock
cannot use in async
applies to other locks (should the above be moved before discussion of mutex specifically? Probably yes)
RWLock
Semaphore
yielding
Other synchronization primitives
notify, barrier
OnceCell
atomics
## Tools for async programming
Why we need specialist tools for async
Are there other tools to cover
loom
Monitoring
Tokio console
Tracing and logging
issues with async tracing
tracing crate (https://github.com/tokio-rs/tracing)
Debugging
Understanding async backtraces (RUST_BACKTRACE and in a debugger)
Techniques for debugging async code
Using Tokio console for debugging
Debugger support (WinDbg?)
Profiling
How async messes up flamegraphs
How to profile async IO
Getting insight into the runtime
Tokio metrics
## Destruction and clean-up
Object destruction and recap of Drop
General clean up requirements in software
Async issues
Might want to do stuff async during clean up, e.g., send a final message
Might need to clean up stuff which is still being used async-ly
Might want to clean up when an async task completes or cancels and there is no way to catch that
State of the runtime during clean-up phase (esp if we’re panicking or whatever)
No async Drop
WIP
forward ref to completion io topic
Cancellation
How it happens (recap of more-async-await.md)
drop a future
cancellation token
abort functions
What we can do about ‘catching’ cancellation
logging or monitoring cancellation
How cancellation affects other futures tasks (forward ref to cancellation safety chapter, this should just be a heads-up)
Panicking and async
Propagation of panics across tasks (spawn result)
Panics leaving data inconsistent (tokio mutexes)
Calling async code when panicking (make sure you don’t)
Patterns for clean-up
Avoid needing clean up (abort/restart)
Don’t use async for cleanup and don’t worry too much
async clean up method + dtor bomb (i.e., separate clean-up from destruction)
centralise/out-source clean-up in a separate task or thread or supervisor object/process
https://tokio.rs/tokio/topics/shutdown
Why no async Drop (yet)
Note this is advanced section and not necessary to read
Why async Drop is hard
Possible solutions and there issues
Current status
## Futures
We’ve talked a lot about futures in the preceding chapters; they’re a key part of Rust’s async programming story! In this chapter we’re going to get into some of the details of what futures are and how they work, and some libraries for working directly with futures.
The Future and IntoFuture traits
Future
Output assoc type
No real detail here, polling is in the next section, reference adv sections on Pin, executors/wakers
IntoFuture
Usage - general, in await, async builder pattern (pros and cons in using)
Boxing futures, Box<dyn Future> and how it used to be common and necessary but mostly isn’t now, except for recursion, etc.
Polling
what it is and who does it, Poll type
ready is final state
how it connects with await
drop = cancel
for futures and thus tasks
implications for async programming in general
reference to chapter on cancellation safety
Fusing
futures-rs crate
History and purpose
see streams chapter
helpers for writing executors or other low-level futures stuff
pinning and boxing
executor as a partial runtime (see alternate runtimes in reference)
TryFuture
convenience futures: pending, ready, ok/err, etc.
combinator functions on FutureExt
alternative to Tokio stuff
functions
IO traits
futures-concurrency crate
https://docs.rs/futures-concurrency/latest/futures_concurrency/
## Runtimes and runtime issues
Running async code
Explicit startup vs async main
tokio context concept
block_on
runtime as reflected in the code (Runtime, Handle)
runtime shutdown
Threads and tasks
default work stealing, multi-threaded
revisit Send + ’static bounds
yield
spawn-local
spawn-blocking (recap), block-in-place
tokio-specific stuff on yielding to other threads, local vs global queues, etc
Configuration options
thread pool size
single threaded, thread per core etc.
Alternate runtimes
Why you’d want to use a different runtime or implement your own
What kind of variations exist in the high-level design
Forward ref to adv chapters
## Timers and Signal handling
Time and Timers
runtime integration, don’t use thread::sleep, etc.
std Instant and Duration
sleep
interval
timeout
special future vs select/race
Signal handling
what is signal handling and why is it an async issue?
very OS specific
see Tokio docs
## Async iterators (FKA streams)
Stream as an async iterator or as many futures
WIP
current status
futures and Tokio Stream traits
nightly trait
lazy like sync iterators
pinning and streams (forward ref to pinning chapter)
fused streams
Consuming an async iterator
while let with async next
for_each, for_each_concurrent
collect
into_future, buffered
Stream combinators
Taking a future instead of a closure
Some example combinators
unordered variations
StreamGroup
join/select/race with streams
hazards with select in a loop
fusing
difference to just futures
alternatives to these
Stream::merge, etc.
Implementing an async iterator
Implementing the trait
Practicalities and util functions
async_iter stream macro
Sinks
https://docs.rs/futures/latest/futures/sink/index.html
Future work
current status
https://rust-lang.github.io/rfcs/2996-async-iterator.html
async next vs poll
async iteration syntax
(async) generators
lending iterators
## Cancellation and cancellation safety
Internal vs external cancellation
Threads vs futures
drop = cancel
only at await points
useful feature
still somewhat abrubt and surprising
Other cancellation mechanisms
abort
cancellation tokens
Cancellation safety
Not a memory safety issue or race condition
Data loss or other logic errors
Different definitions/names
tokio’s definition
general definition/halt safety
applying a replicated future idea
Simple data loss
Resumption
Issue with select or similar in loops
Splitting state between the future and the context as a root cause
## Pinning
Pinning is a notoriously difficult concept and has some subtle and confusing properties. This section will go over the topic in depth (arguably too much depth). Pinning is key to the implementation of async programming in Rust1, but it’s possible to get far without ever encountering pinning and certainly without having to have a deep understanding.
The first section will give a summary of pinning, which hopefully is enough for most async programmers to know. The rest of this chapter is for implementers, others doing advanced or low-level async programming, and the curious.
After the summary, this chapter will give some background on move semantics before getting into pinning. We’ll cover the general idea, then the Pin and Unpin types, how pinning achieves it goals, and several topics about working with pinning in practice. There are then sections on pinning and async programming, and some alternatives and extensions to pinning (for the really curious). At the end of the chapter are some links to alternative explanations and reference material.
TL;DR
Pin marks a pointer as pointing to an object which will not move until it is dropped. Pinning is not built-in to the language or compiler; it works by simply restricting access to mutable references to the pointee. It is easy enough to break pinning in unsafe code, but like all safety guarantees in unsafe code, it is the responsibility of the programmer not to do so.
By guaranteeing that an object won’t move, pinning makes it safe to have references from one field of a struct to another (sometimes called self-references). This is required for the implementation of async functions (which are implemented as data structures where variables are stored as fields, since variables may reference each other, fields of a future implementing an async function must be able to reference each other). Mostly, programmers don’t have to be aware of this detail, but when dealing with futures directly, you might need to be because the signature of Future::poll requires self to be pinned.
If you’re using futures by reference, you might need to pin a reference using pin!(...) to ensure the reference still implements the Future trait (this often comes up with the select macro). Likewise, if you want to manually call poll on a future (usually because you are implementing another future), you will need a pinned reference to it (use pin! or ensure arguments have pinned types). If you’re implementing a future or if you have a pinned reference for some other reason, and you want mutable access to the object’s internals, you’ll need to understand the section below on pinned fields to know how to do so and when it is safe.
Move semantics
A useful concept for discussing pinning and related topics is the idea of places. A place is a chunk of memory (with an address) where a value can live. A reference doesn’t really point at a value, it points at a place. That is why *ref = ... makes sense: the dereference gives you the place, not a copy of the value. Places are well-known to language implementers but usually implicit in programming languages (they are implicit in Rust). Programmers usually have a good intuition for places, but may not think of them explicitly.
As well as references, variables and field accesses evaluate to places. In fact, anything that can appear on the left-hand side of an assignment must be a place at runtime (which is why places are called ’lvalue’s in compiler jargon).
In Rust, mutability is a property of places, as is being ‘frozen’ as a result of borrowing (we might say the place is borrowed).
Assignment in Rust moves data (mostly, some simple data has copy semantics, but that doesn’t matter too much). When we write let b = a;, the data that was in memory at a place identified by a is moved to the place identified by b. That means that after the assignment, the data exists at b but no longer exists at a. Or in other words, the address of the object is changed by the assignment2.
If pointers existed to the place which was moved from, the pointers would be invalid since they no longer point to the object. This is why borrowed references prevent moving: let r = &a; let b = a; is illegal, the existence of r prevents a being moved.
The compiler only knows about references from outside an object into the object (such as the above example, or a reference to a field of an object). A reference entirely within an object would be invisible to the compiler. Imagine if we were allowed to write something like:
#![allow(unused)]
fn main() {
struct Bad {
field: u64,
r: &'self u64,
}
}
We could have an instance b of Bad where b.r points to b.field. In let a = b;, the internal reference b.r to b.field is invisible to the compiler, so it looks like there are no references to b and therefore the move to a would be ok. However if that happened, then after the move, a.r would not point to a.field as we’d like, but to invalid memory at the old location of b.field, violating Rust’s safety guarantees.
Moving data isn’t limited to values. Data can also be moved out of a unique reference. Dereferencing a Box moves the data from the heap to the stack. take, replace, and swap (all in std::mem) move data out of a mutable reference (&mut T). Moving out of a Box leaves the pointed-to place invalid. Moving out of a mutable reference leaves the place valid, but containing different data.
Abstractly, a move is implemented by copying the bits from the origin to the destination and then erasing the origin bits. However, the compiler can optimise this is many ways.
Pinning
Important note: I’m going to start by discussing an abstract concept of pinning, which is not exactly what is expressed by any particular type. We’ll make the concept more concrete as we go on, and end up with precise definitions of what different types mean, but none of these types mean exactly the same as the pinning concept we’ll start with.
An object is pinned if it will not be moved or otherwise invalidated. As I explained above, this is not a new concept - borrowing an object prevents the object being moved for the duration of the borrow. Whether an object can be moved or not is not explicit in Rust’s types, though it is known by the compiler (which is why you can get “cannot move out of” error messages). As opposed to borrowing (and the temporary restriction on moves caused by borrowing), being pinned is permanent. An object can change from being not pinned to being pinned, but once it is pinned then it must remain pinned until it is dropped3.
Just as pointer types reflect the ownership and mutability of the pointee (e.g., Box vs &, &mut vs &), we want to reflect pinned-ness in pointer types too. This is not a property of the pointer - the pointer is not pinned or movable - it is a property of the pointed-to place: whether the pointee can be moved out of its place.
Roughly, Pin<Box<T>> is a pointer to an owned, pinned object and Pin<&mut T> is a pointer to a uniquely borrowed, mutable, pinned object (c.f., &mut T which is a pointer to a uniquely borrowed, mutable, object which may or may not be pinned).
The pinning concept was not added to Rust until after 1.0 and for reasons of backwards compatibility, there is no way to explicitly express whether an object is pinned or not. We can only express that a reference points to a pinned or not-pinned object.
Pinning is orthogonal to mutability. An object might be mutable and either pinned (Pin<&mut T>) or not (&mut T) (i.e., the object can be modified, and either it is pinned in place or can be moved), or immutable and either pinned (Pin<&T>) or not (T) (i.e., the object can’t be modified, and either it can’t be moved or can be moved but not modified). Note that &T cannot be mutated or moved, but is not pinned because its immovability is only temporary.
Unpin
Although moving and not moving is how we introduced pinning and is somewhat suggested by the name, Pin does not actually tell you much about whether the pointee will actually move or not.
What? Sigh.
Pinning is actually a contract about validity, not about moving. It guarantees that if an object is address-sensitive, then its address will not change (and thus addresses derived from it, such as the addresses of its fields, will not change either). Most data in Rust is not address-sensitive. It can be moved around and everything will be ok. Pin guarantees that the pointee will be valid with respect to it’s address. If the pointee is address-sensitive, then it can’t be moved; if it’s not address-sensitive, then it doesn’t matter whether it is moved.
Unpin is a trait which expresses whether objects are address-sensitive. If an object implements Unpin, then it is not address-sensitive. If an object is !Unpin then it is address-sensitive. Alternatively, if we think of pinning as the act of holding an object in its place, then Unpin means it is safe to undo that action and allow the object to be moved.
Unpin is an auto-trait and most types are Unpin. Only types which have an !Unpin field or which explicitly opt-out are not Unpin. You can opt-out by having a PhantomPinned field or (if you’re using nightly) with impl !Unpin for ... {}.
For types which implement Unpin, Pin essentially does nothing. Pin<Box<T>> and Pin<&mut T> can be used just like Box<T> and &mut T. In fact, for Unpin types, the Pined and regular pointers can be freely-interconverted using Pin::new and Pin::into_inner. It’s worth restating: Pin<...> does not guarantee that the pointee will not move, only that the pointee won’t move if it is !Unpin.
The practical implication of the above is that working with Unpin types and pinning is much easier than with types which are not Unpin, in fact the Pin marker has basically no effect on Unpin types and pointers to Unpin types, and you can basically ignore all the pinning guarantees and requirements.
Unpin should not be understood as a property of an object alone; the only thing Unpin changes is how an object interacts with Pin. Using an Unpin bound outside of the pinning context doesn’t affect the compiler’s behaviour or what can be done with the object. The only reason to use Unpin is in conjunction with pinning, or to propagate the bound to where it is used with pinning.
Pin
Pin is a marker type, it is important for type checking, but is compiled away and does not exist at runtime (Pin<Ptr> is guaranteed to have the same memory layout and ABI as Ptr). It is a wrapper of pointers (such as Box), so it behaves like a pointer type, but it does not add an indirection, Box<Foo> and Pin<Box<Foo>> are the same when a program is run. It is better to think of Pin as a modifier to the pointer rather than a pointer itself.
Pin<Ptr> means that the pointee of Ptr (not Ptr itself) is pinned. That is, Pin guarantees that the pointee (not the pointer) will remain valid with respect to its address until the pointee is dropped. If the pointee is address-sensitive (i.e., is !Unpin), then the pointee will not be moved.
Pinning values
Objects are not created pinned. An object starts unpinned (and may be freely moved), it becomes pinned when a pinning pointer is created which points to the object. If the object is Unpin, then this is trivial using Pin::new, however, if the object is not Unpin, then pinning it must ensure that it cannot be moved or invalidated via an alias.
To pin an object on the heap, you can create a new pinning Box by using Box::pin, or convert an existing Box into a pinning Box using Box::into_pin. In either case, you’ll end up with Pin<Box<T>>. Some other pointers (such as Arc and Rc) have similar mechanisms. For pointers which don’t, or for your own pointer types, you’ll need to use Pin::new_unchecked to create a pinned pointer4. This is an unsafe function and so the programmer must ensure that Pin’s invariants are maintained. That is, that the pointee will, under every circumstance, remain valid until it’s destructor is called. There are some subtle details to ensuring this, refer to the function’s docs or the below section how pinning works for more.
Box::pin pins an object to a place in the heap. To pin an object on the stack, you can use the pin macro to create and pin a mutable reference (Pin<&mut T>)5.
Tokio also has a pin macro which does the same thing as the std macro and also supports assigning into a variable inside the macro. The futures-rs and pin-utils crates have a pin_mut macro which used to be commonly used, but is now deprecated in favor of the std macro.
You can also use Pin::static_ref and Pin::static_mut to pin a static reference.
Using pinned types
In theory, using pinned pointers is just like using any other pointer type. However, because it is not the most intuitive abstraction, and because it has no language support, using pinned pointers tends to be pretty unergonomic. The most common case for using pinning is when dealing with futures and streams, we’ll cover those specifics in more detail below.
Using a pinned pointer as an immutably borrowed reference is trivial because of Pin’s implementation of Deref. You can mostly just treat Poll<Ptr<T>> as &T, using an explicit deref() if necessary. Likewise, getting a Pin<&T> is pretty easy using as_ref().
The most common way to work with pinned types is using Pin<&mut T> (e.g., in Future::poll), however, the easiest way to produce a pinned object is Box::pin which gives a Pin<Box<T>>. You can convert the latter to the former using Pin::as_mut. However, without the language support for reusing references (implicit reborrowing), you have to keep calling as_mut rather than reusing the result. E.g. (from the as_mut docs),
#![allow(unused)]
fn main() {
impl Type {
fn method(self: Pin<&mut Self>) {
// do something
}
fn call_method_twice(mut self: Pin<&mut Self>) {
// `method` consumes `self`, so reborrow the `Pin<&mut Self>` via `as_mut`.
self.as_mut().method();
self.as_mut().method();
}
}
}
If you need to access the pinned pointee in some other way, you can do so via Pin::into_inner_unchecked. However, this is unsafe and you must be very careful about ensuring the safety requirements of Pin are respected.
How pinning works
Pin is a simple wrapper struct (aka, a newtype) for pointers. It is enforced to work only on pointers by requiring the Deref bound on it’s generic parameter to do anything useful, however, this is just for expressing intention, rather than for preserving safety. As with most newtype wrappers, Pin exists to express an invariant at compile-time rather than for any runtime effect. Indeed, in most circumstances, Pin and the pinning machinery will completely disappear during compilation.
To be precise, the invariant expressed by Pin is about validity, not just movability. It is also a validity invariant which only applies once a pointer is pinned - before that Pin has no effect and makes no requirements on what happens before something is pinned. Once a pointer is pinned, Pin requires (and guarantees in safe code) that the pointed-to object will remain valid at the same address in memory until the object’s destructor is called.
For immutable pointers (e.g., borrowed references), Pin has no effect - since the pointee cannot be mutated or replaced, there is no danger of it being invalidated.
For a pointer that allows mutation (e.g., Box or &mut), having direct access to that pointer or access to a mutable reference (&mut) to the pointee could allow for mutation or moving the pointee. Pin simply does not provide any (non-unsafe) way to get direct access to the pointer or a mutable reference. The usual way for a pointer to provide a mutable reference to its pointee is by implementing DerefMut, Pin only implements DerefMut if the pointee is Unpin.
This implementation is incredibly simple! To summarize: Pin is a wrapper struct around a pointer which provides only immutable access to the pointee (and mutable access if the pointee is Unpin). Everything else is details (and subtle invariants for unsafe code). For convenience, Pin provides a facility to convert between Pin types (always safe since the pointer cannot escape a Pin), etc.
Pin also provides unsafe functions for creating pinned pointers and accessing the underlying data. As with all unsafe functions, maintaining the safety invariants is the responsibility of the programmer rather than the compiler. Unfortunately, the safety invariants for pinning are somewhat scattered, in that they are enforced in different places and are hard to describe in a global, unified manner. I won’t describe them in detail here and refer you to the docs, but I’ll attempt to summarize (see the module docs for a detailed overview):
Creating a new pinned pointer new_unchecked. The programmer must ensure that the pointee is pinned (that is, abides by the pinning invariants). This requirement may be satisfied by the pointer type alone (e.g., in the case of Box) or may require participation of the pointee type (e.g., in the case of &mut). This includes (but is not limited to):
Not moving out of self in Deref and DerefMut.
Properly implementing Drop, see the drop guarantee.
Opting out of Unpin (by using PhantomPinned) if you require the pinning guarantees.
The pointee may not be #[repr(packed)].
Accessing the pinned value into_inner_unchecked, get_unchecked_mut, map_unchecked, and map_unchecked_mut. It becomes the programmer’s responsibility to enforce the pinning guarantees (including not moving the data) from the moment data is accessed until it’s destructor runs (note that this scope of responsibility extends beyond the unsafe call and applies whatever happens to the underlying data).
Not providing any other way to move data out of a pinned type (which would need an unsafe implementation).
Pinning pointer types
We said earlier that Pin wraps a pointer type. It is common to see Pin<Box<T>>, Pin<&T>, and Pin<&mut T>. Technically, the only requirement of the pinning pointer type is that it implements Deref. However, there are no ways to create a Pin<Ptr> for any other pointer types other than using unsafe code (via new_unchecked). Doing so has requirements on the pointer type to ensure the pinning contract:
The pointer’s implementations of Deref and DerefMut must not move out of their pointee.
It must not be possible to obtain an &mut reference to the pointee at any time after the Pin is created, even after the Pin has been dropped (this is why you can’t safely construct a Pin<&mut T> from an &mut T). This must remain true via multiple steps or via references (which prevents using Rc or Arc).
The pointer’s implementation of Drop must not move (or otherwise invalidate) it’s pointee.
See the new_unchecked docs for more detail.
Pinning and Drop
The pinning contract applies until the pinned object is dropped (technically, that means when its drop method returns, not when it is called). This is usually fairly straightforward since drop is called automatically when objects are destroyed. If you are doing things manually with an object’s lifecycle, you might need to give it some extra thought. If you have an object which is (or might be) pinned and that object is not Unpin, then you must call it’s drop method (using drop_in_place) before deallocating or reusing the object’s memory or address. See the std docs for details.
If you are implementing an address-sensitive type (i.e., one that is !Unpin), then you must take extra care with the Drop implementation. Even though the self-type in drop is &mut Self, you must treat the self-type as Pin<&mut Self>. In other words, you must ensure the object remains valid until the drop function returns. One way to make this explicit in the source code is to follow the following idiom:
#![allow(unused)]
fn main() {
impl Drop for Type {
fn drop(&mut self) {
// `new_unchecked` is okay because we know this value is never used
// again after being dropped.
inner_drop(unsafe { Pin::new_unchecked(self)});
fn inner_drop(this: Pin<&mut Self>) {
// Actual drop code goes here.
}
}
}
}
Note that the validity requirements will be dependent on the type being implemented. Precisely defining these requirements, especially concerning object destruction is recommended, especially if multiple objects could be involved (e.g., an intrusive linked list). Ensuring correctness here is likely to be interesting!
Pinned self in methods
Calling methods on pinned types leads to thinking about the self-type in these methods. If the method does not need to mutate self, then you can still use &self since Pin<...> can dereference to a borrowed reference. However, if you need to mutate self (and your type is not Unpin) then you need to choose between &mut self and self: Pin<&mut Self> (although pinned pointers can’t be implicitly coerced to the latter type, they can be easily converted using Pin::as_mut).
Using &mut self makes the implementation easy, but means the method cannot be called on a pinned object. Using self: Pin<&mut Self> means considering pin projection (see the next section) and can only be called on a pinned object. Although this is all a bit confounding, it makes sense intuitively when you remember that pinning is a phased concept - objects start unpinned, and at some point undergo a phase change to become pinned. &mut self methods are ones which can be called in the first (unpinned) phase and self: Pin<&mut Self> methods are ones which can be called in the second (pinned) phase.
Note that drop takes &mut self (even though it might be called in either phase). This is due to a limitation of the language and the desire for backwards compatibility. It requires special treatment in the compiler and comes with safety requirements.
Pinned fields, structural pinning, and pin projection
Given that an object is pinned, what does that tell us about the ‘pinned’-ness of its fields? The answer depends on choices made by the implementer of the datatype, there is no universal answer (indeed it can be different for different fields of the same object).
If the pinned-ness of an object propagates to a field, we say the field exhibits ‘structural pinning’ or that pinning is projected with the field. In this case there should be a projection method fn get_field(self: Pin<&mut Self>) -> Pin<&mut Field>. If the field is not structurally pinned, then a projection method should have signature fn get_field(self: Pin<&mut Self>) -> &mut Field. Implementing either method (or implementing similar code) requires unsafe code and either choice has safety implications. Pin-propagation must be consistent, a field must always be structurally pinned or not, it is nearly always unsound for a field to be structurally pinned at some times and not at others.
Pinning should project to a field if the field is an address-sensitive part of the aggregate datatype. That is, if the aggregate being pinned depends on the field being pinned, then pinning must project to that field. For example, if there is a reference from another part of the aggregate into the field, or if there is a self-reference within the field, then pinning must project to the field. On the other hand, for a generic collection, pinning does not need to project to it’s contents since the collection does not rely on their behaviour (that’s because the collection cannot rely on the implementation of the generic items it contains, so the collection itself cannot rely on the addresses of its items).
When writing unsafe code, you can only assume that the pinning guarantees apply to the fields of an object which are structurally pinned. On the other hand, you can safely treat non-structurally pinned fields as moveable and not worry about the pinning requirements for them. In particular, a struct can be Unpin even if a field is not, as long as that field is always treated as not being structurally pinned.
If a field is structurally pinned, then the pinning requirements on the aggregate struct extend to the field. Under no circumstance can code move the contents of the field while the aggregate is pinned (this would always require unsafe code). Structurally pinned fields must be dropped before they are moved (including deallocation) even in the case of panicking, which means care must be taken within the aggregate’s Drop impl. Furthermore, the aggregate struct cannot be Unpin unless all of its structurally-pinned fields are.
Macros for pin projection
There are macros available for helping with pin projection.
The pin-project crate provides the #[pin_project] attribute macro (and the #[pin] helper attribute) which implements safe pin projection for you by creating a pinned version of the annotated type which can be accessed using the project method on the annotated type.
Pin-project-lite is an alternative using a declarative macro (pin_project!) which works in a very similar way to pin-project. Pin-project-lite is lightweight in the sense that it is not a procedural macro and therefore does not add dependences for implementing procedural macros to your project. However, it is less expressive than pin-project and does not give custom error messages. Pin-project-lite is recommended if you want to avoid adding the procedural macro dependencies, and pin-project is recommended otherwise.
Pin-utils provides the unsafe_pinned macro to help implement pin projection, but the whole crate is deprecated in favor of the above crates and functionality now in std.
Assigning to a pinned pointer
It is generally safe to assign into a pinned pointer. Although this can’t be done in the usual way (*p = ...), it can be done using Pin::set. More generally, you can use unsafe code to assign into fields of the pointee.
Using Pin::set is always safe since the previously pinned pointee will be dropped, fulfilling the pin requirements and the new pointee is not pinned until the move into the pinned place is complete. Assigning into individual fields does not automatically violate the pinning requirements, but care must be taken to ensure that the object as a whole remains valid. For example, if a field is assigned into, then any other fields which reference that field must still be valid with the new object (this is not part of the pinning requirements, but might be part of the object’s other invariants).
Copying one pinned object into another pinned place can only be done in unsafe code, how safety is maintained depends on the individual object. There is no general violation of the pinning requirements - the object being replaced is not moving and nor is the object being copied. However, the validity of the object being replaced may have safety requirements which are usually protected by pinning, but in this case must be established by the programmer. For example, if we have a struct with two fields a and b where b refers to a, that reference requires pinning to be remain valid. If such a struct is copied into another place, then the value of b must be updated to point to the new a rather than the old one.
Pinning and async programming
Hopefully, you can do all you ever want to do with async Rust and never worry about pinning. Sometimes you’ll hit a corner case which requires using pinning and if you want to do implement futures, a runtime, or similar things, you’ll need to know about pinning. In this section, I’ll explain why.
Async functions are implemented as futures (see section TODO - this is a summary overview, make sure we explain more deeply and with examples elsewhere). At each await point execution of the function may be paused and during that time the values of live variables must be saved. They essentially become fields of a struct (which is part of an enum). Such variables may refer to other variables which are saved in the future, e.g., consider,
#![allow(unused)]
fn main() {
async fn foo() {
let a = ...;
let b = &a;
bar().await;
// use b
}
}
The generated future object here will be something like:
#![allow(unused)]
fn main() {
struct Foo {
a: A,
b: &'self A,  // Invariant `self.b == &self.a`
}
}
(I’m simplifying a bit, ignoring the state of execution, etc., but the important bit is the variables/fields).
This makes intuitive sense, unfortunately 'self does not exist in Rust. And for good reason! Remember that Rust objects can be moved, so code like the following would be unsound:
#![allow(unused)]
fn main() {
let f1 = Foo { ... }; // f1.b == &f1.a
let f2 = f1; // f2.b == &f1.a, but f1 no longer exists since it moved to f2
}
Note that this is not just an issue of not being able to name the lifetime, even if we use raw pointers, such code would still be incorrect.
However, if we know that once it is created, then an instance of Foo will never move, then everything Just Works. (The compiler has a concept similar to 'self internally for such cases, as a programmer, we would have to use raw pointers and unsafe code). This concept of not moving is exactly what pinning describes.
We see this requirement in the signature of Future::poll, where the type of self (the future) is Pin<&mut Self>. Mostly, when using async/await, the compiler takes care of pinning and unpinning, and as a programmer you don’t need to worry about it.
Manual pinning
There are some places where pinning leaks through the abstraction of async/await. At its root, this is due to the Pin in the signature of Future::poll and Stream::poll_next. When using futures and streams directly (rather than through async/await), we might need to consider pinning to make things work. Some common reasons to need pinned types are:
Polling a future or stream - either in application code or when implementing your own future.
Using boxed futures. If you’re using boxed futures (or streams) and therefore writing out future types rather than using async functions, you’ll likely see a lot of Pin<...> in those types and need to use Box::pin to create the futures.
Implementing a future - inside poll, self is pinned and therefore you need to work with pin projection and/or unsafe code to get mutable access to fields of self.
Combining futures or streams. This mostly just works, but if you need to take a reference to a future and then poll it (e.g., defining a future outside a loop and using it in select! inside the loop), then you will need to pin the reference to the future in order to use the reference like a future.
Working with streams - there is currently less abstraction in Rust around streams than futures, so you’re more likely to use combinator methods (which don’t technically require pinning, but seems to make issues around referencing or creating futures/streams more prevalent) or even poll manually than when working with futures.
Alternatives and extensions
This section is for those with a curiosity about the language design around pinning. You absolutely don’t need to read this section if you just want to read, understand, and write async programs.
Pinning is difficult to understand and can feel a bit clunky, so people often wonder if there is a better alternative or variation. I’ll cover a few alternatives and show why they either don’t work or are more complex than you might expect.
However before that, it’s important to understand the historical context for pinning. If you are designing a brand new language and want to support async/await, self-references, or immovable types there are certainly better ways to do so than Rust’s pinning. However, async/await, futures, and pinning were added to Rust after it’s 1.0 release and designed in the context of a strong backwards-compatibility guarantee. Beyond that hard requirement, there was a requirement of wanting to design and implement this feature in a reasonable time frame. Some solutions (e.g., those involving linear types) would require fundamental research, design, and implementation that would realistically be measured in decades when considering the resources and constraints of the Rust project.
Alternatives
First, lets consider the class of solutions which make Rust types non-movable by default. Note that this is a significant change to the fundamental semantics of Rust; any solution in this class would likely need significant effort to achieve backwards-compatibility (I won’t speculate on if that’s even possible for specific solutions, but with techniques like auto-traits, derive attributes, editions, migration tooling, etc., it is possibly possible).
One proposal (really, a group of proposals since there are various ways to define the semantics) is to have a Move marker trait (similar to Copy) which marks objects as movable and all other types would be immovable. In contrast to Pin, this is a property of values, not of pointers, so the effect is much more far-reaching, e.g., let a = b; would be an error if b does not implement Move.
The fundamental problem with this approach is that pinning today is a phased concept (a place starts unpinned and becomes pinned) and types apply to the whole lifetime of values. (Pinning is also best understood as a property of places rather than values, but types apply to values, whether this is a fundamental problem for any trait-based approach, I don’t know). This is explored in these two blog posts: Two Ways Not to Move and Ergonomic Self-Referential Types for Rust.
Furthermore, any Move trait is likely to have problems with backwards-compatibility and lead to ‘infectious bounds’ (i.e., Move or !Move would be required in many, many places).
Another proposal is to support move constructors similar to C++. However, this breaks the fundamental invariant of Rust that objects can always be bit-wise moved. That would make Rust much less predictable and therefore make Rust programs more difficult to understand and debug. This is a backwards-incompatible change of the worst kind because it would silently break unsafe code because it changes a fundamental assumption that authors of the code may have made. Furthermore, the design and implementation effort required for such a fundamental change would be huge. On top of those practical issues, it’s unclear if it would even work: move constructors could be used to fix-up references in the object being moved, but there might be references to the object being moved from outside the object which could not be fixed up.
A potential solution of a different kind is the idea of offset references. This is a reference which is relative rather than absolute, i.e., a field which is an offset reference to another field would always point within the same object, even if the object is moved in memory. The issue with offset pointers is that a field must be either an offset pointer or an absolute pointer. But references in async function become fields which sometimes reference memory internal to the future object and sometimes reference memory outside it.
Extensions
There are multiple proposals for making pinning more powerful and/or easier to work with. These are mostly proposals to make pinning a more first-class part of the language in various ways, rather than a purely library concept (they often include extensions to std as well as the language). I’ll cover a few of the more developed ideas, they are related to each other and all have the general goal of improving pinning ergonomics by making creating and using pinned places easier, in particular around structural pinning and drop.
Pinned places runs with the idea that pinning is property of places rather than values or types, and adds a pin/pinned modifier to references similar to mut. This integrates with reborrowing and method resolution to improve the ergonomics of method calls with pinned self.
UnpinCell extends the pinned places idea to support native pin projection of fields. MinPin is a more minimal (and backwards-compatible) proposal for native pin projection and better drop support.
The Overwrite trait is a proposed trait which makes explicit the distinction between permission to modify a part of an object (foo.f = ...) and permission to overwrite the whole object (*foo = ...), both of which are currently allowed for all mutable references. The proposal also includes immutable fields. Overwrite is a sort-of-replacement for Unpin which (together with some of the ideas from pinned places) could improve working with pinning. Unfortunately, although it could be adopted backwards-compatibly, the transition would be a lot more work than for the other extensions.
References
std docs source of truth for behaviour and guarantees of Pin, etc. Good docs.
Pin, Unpin, pin macro
RFC 2349 the RFC which proposed pinning. The stabilized API is a bit different from the one proposed here, but there is a good explanation of the core concept and rationale in the RFC.
Some blog posts or other resources explaining pinning:
Pin by WithoutBoats (the primary designer of pinning) on the history, context, and rationale of pinning, and why it is a difficult concept.
Why is std::pin::Pin so weird? deep dive into the rationale of the pinning design and using pinning in practice.
Pin, Unpin, and why Rust needs them
Pinning section of async/await
Pin and suffering thorough blog post in a very conversational style about understanding async code and pinning with lots of examples.
The book Rust for Rustaceans by Jon Gjengset has an excellent description of why pinning is necessary for the implementation of async/await and how pinning works.
It’s worth noting that pinning is a low-level building block designed specifically for the implementation of async Rust. Although it is not directly tied to async Rust and can be used for other purposes, it was not designed to be a general-purpose mechanism, and in particular is not an out-of-the-box solution for self-referential fields. Using pinning for anything other than async code generally only works if it is wrapped in thick layers of abstraction, since it will require lots of fiddly and hard to reason about unsafe code. ↩
We’re conflating source code and runtime a bit here. To be absolutely clear, variables don’t exist at runtime. The (compiled) snippet might be executed multiple times (e.g., if it’s in a loop or in a function called multiple times). For each execution the variables in the source code will be represented by different addresses at runtime. ↩
Permanence is not a fundamental aspect of pinning, it is part of the framing of pinning in Rust and the safety guarantees around it. It would be ok for pinning to be temporary if this could be safely expressed and the temporal scope of pinning could be relied upon by consumers of the pinning guarantees. However, that is not possible with Rust today or with any reasonable extension. ↩
There is no special treatment for Box (or the other std pointers) either in the pinning implementation or the compiler. Box uses the unsafe functions in Pin’s API to implement Box::pin. The safety requirements of Pin are satisfied due to the safety guarantees of Box. ↩
This is only strictly pinning to the stack in non-async functions. In an async function, all locals are allocated in the async pseudo-stack, so the place being pinned is likely to be stored on the heap as part of the future underlying the async function. ↩
## Structured Concurrency
Authors note (TODO): we might want to discuss some parts of this chapter much earlier in the book, in particularly as design principles (first intro is in guide/intro). However, in the interests of better understanding the topic and getting something written down, I’m starting with a separate chapter. It’s also still a bit rough.
(Note: the first few sections are talking about the abstract concept of structured concurrency and is not specific to Rust or async programming (c.f., synchronous concurrent programming with threads). I use ‘task’ to mean any thread or async task or other similar concurrency primitive).
Structured concurrency is a philosophy for designing concurrent programs. For programs to fully adhere to the principals of structured concurrency requires certain language features and libraries, but many of the benefits are available by following the philosophy without such features. Structured concurrency is independent of language and concurrency primitives (threads vs async, etc.). Many people have found the ideas from structured concurrency to be useful when programming with async Rust.
The essential idea of structured concurrency is that tasks are organised into a tree. Child tasks start after their parents and always finish before them. This allows results and errors to always be passed back to parent tasks, and requires that cancellation of parents is always propagated to child tasks. Primarily, temporal scope follows lexical scope, which means that a task should not outlive the function or block where it is created. However, this is not a requirement of structured concurrency as long as longer-lived tasks are reified in the program in some way (typically by using an object to represent the temporal scope of a child task within its parent task).
TODO diagram
Structured concurrency is named by analogy to structured programming, which is the idea that control flow should be structured using functions, loops, etc., rather than arbitrary jumps (goto).
Before we consider structured concurrency, it’s helpful to reflect on the sense in which common concurrent designs are unstructured. A typical pattern is that a task is started using some kind of spawning statement. That task then runs to completion concurrently with other tasks in the system (including the task which spawned it). There is no constraint on which task finishes first. The program is essentially just a bag of tasks which live independently and might terminate at any time. Any communication or synchronization of the tasks is ad hoc, and the programmer cannot assume that any other task will still be running.
The practical downsides of unstructured concurrency are that returning results from a task must happen in an extra-linguistic fashion with no language-level guarantees around when or how this happens. Errors may go uncaught because languages’ error handling mechanisms cannot be applied to the unconstrained control flow of unstructured concurrency. We also have no guarantees about the relative 
[... truncated at 150,000 chars ...]


