=== ROW 174 | f009334 | https://internals.rust-lang.org/t/request-provide-an-official-way-to-deprecate-a-crate-not-yank-yank-is-stupid/24174 | 2026-04-15 | internals ===
Request: Provide an official way to *deprecate* a crate. NOT yank. Yank is stupid

@KSXGitHub · 2026-04-15T06:18:38.903Z:
Yank breaks things. It is also way too alarmist.
Library developers nowadays just published a new version with -deprecated suffix or something, but this is a hack.
Other library developers publish a new major versions with empty code. This too is a hack.
I just want a way to mark independent versions of packages or ranges of versions of packages as deprecated along with a message explaining the reason. Not as forceful as a yank. And far more semantically relevant than the two hacks I described.
Tools and automated bots. They are unlikely to recognize the hacks I mentioned as "deprecation" because their semantics aren't defined.
Consumer developers, upon seeing the deprecation messages, they can either choose to ignore them, or fix them in their free time, or let the tools and automated bots (which can now correctly intepret deprecation as deprecation) fix it for them.
NPM has this for decades. It is a known practice.

---

@RelunSec · 2026-04-15T06:51:29.643Z:
That is a very good proposal, and dozens similar to that one

---

@mathstuf · 2026-04-15T13:33:07.320Z:
It would mean some kind of crates.io-specific metadata, but why not have maintenance status associated with versions? New compatible versions can mark old ones as "update available", maintainers could mark version series as "unmaintained" or "dangerous", and folks could become maintainers and "resurrect" a version series for $reasons. I think yanking is fine for pervasive unsoundness (i.e., some core API is unsound, not necessarily "a function that 'no one' uses is unsound"). This metadata could be used by cargo outdated and cargo audit to recommend actions.

---

@newpavlov · 2026-04-15T13:52:32.977Z:
This could be resolved by a deeper integration with the RustSec database which already has unmaintained advisories. crates.io already pulls RustSec security advisories (indirectly through GithHub, but still), so I think it could be improved further. In other words, this metadata does not have to be part of the crates.io registry.

---

@CodesInChaos · 2026-04-15T14:43:16.550Z:
I think the author of a crate should be able to mark their crate as unmaintained or deprecated directly from the crates.io web-interface, without having to open a PR on a third-party github repository.

---

@KSXGitHub · 2026-04-15T14:50:46.200Z:
I guess where the deprecation metadata is actually stored can be flexible.
However, regardless of where it is stored, I think it's important (in the user-facing side) that crate authors and maintainers don't have to go through any hoops or login to any 3rd-party services just to deprecate a package/version.
The crate author/maintainer should be able to run cargo deprecate <PKG_NAME>[@<VERSION_RANGE>] -m <REASON> as long as they have valid token on their ~/.cargo/credentials.toml.
Alternatively, they can just deprecate the packages/versions on the web UI of crates.io.

---

@kornel · 2026-04-16T21:28:21.335Z:
Agreed. The current situation is not great.
As a maintainer, I don't want users of my libraries to run into old bugs I've already fixed. It wastes their time, and mine too if they complain about it to me.
Even if old versions technically work fine, there's an ecosystem-wide cost of code bloat caused by multiple semver major versions being used at the same time.
So I'd like to nudge users more to upgrade, at least move off super old versions. I'm currently using yank for this, but it's too harsh. I'd rather not break builds without Cargo.lock, just make noise about old versions to ensure users are staying on the old versions intentionally and not just by inertia.

---

@epage · 2026-04-16T21:32:40.487Z:
This Development-cycle in Cargo: 1.78 | Inside Rust Blog has some context on a potential replacement for the old maintenance status badges.  I believe it is mainly lacking in someone driving it forward (further exploring the space and experimenting with how it should be designed and implemented).

---

@dlight · 2026-04-17T01:45:29.780Z:
I think that any maintenance flag should decay over time. Otherwise one could set a crate as maintained, forget about it for 5 years, and the whole time the crate shows up as maintained. The system does not work if the information isn't up to date.

---

@mathstuf · 2026-04-17T02:02:10.999Z:
Not every crate requires active maintenance to keep it up-to-date though. I feel like "yep, still alive" commits or tags is just unnecessary noise (just like "fix formatting" commits). It is rare though.

---

@kpreid · 2026-04-17T02:21:32.505Z:
That's why it makes sense to have such a status, if it were to exist, be metadata outside the package like yanking is — so that it can be updated in whichever way without publishing a new version.
I imagine crates.io showing something like “The owner of this package declared that it was [deprecated | still maintained] [<time period> ago]", so that readers can make their own judgement about age.
(Of course, there’s no robust way to stop maintainers from automating posting "still maintained"…)

---

@epage · 2026-04-17T14:03:06.698Z:
I could see not mentioning how long it has been since the last activity (including a publishing clicking "I'm still here" on the crate settings) until after a certain period of time, like 6 months or a year.  I could also see crates.io emailing the pubishers letting them know certain crates will be leaving the grace window soon unless some activity is present, linking to a "I'm still here" link.

---

@KSXGitHub · 2026-04-17T15:27:16.156Z:
This request of mine is more about library maintainers/authors willfully, explicitly choose to deprecate a package or a version of a package. It's not about automatically and implicitly burdening them with false activities.
In other words, this proposal of mine is focusing more on the side of active library authors/maintainers than on the users of the libraries.
epage:
I could also see crates.io emailing the pubishers letting them know certain crates will be leaving the grace window soon unless some activity is present, linking to a "I'm still here" link.
If crates.io really does that, I could see a controversy from miles away. Many would be annoyed. I myself would hate this.
If the users really want to see maintainence status of a package, they should check the git activities themselves, and compare it with issues, pull requests, the size of the codebase, the completeness of the APIs, etc. all by themselves (or some automated tools).
Anyway, it'd be nice if the discussion could focus back on cargo deprecate vs. cargo yank.

---

@steffahn · 2026-04-17T18:09:54.670Z:
I think this should work like "last seen online" status in messenging apps: some people would like to share this, others would find it annoying. In consequence, the crate author could opt in to setting such status information on their crates, but they shouldn't be forced. The opt-in could be the same as the first time you press a "this is still maintained" button on a particular crate. (And you should be able to change your mind and opt out again later.)
Email reminders should be a separate opt-in; I believe it's only acceptable to send each crate author an email unmasked for once (once per person not per crate), the first time one of their crates (that they have opted in to share a status in the first place, as described above) is about to become considered "old".
That email can then contain a section like "This is a one-time demonstration of the crate grace window notification feature. Click here if you do want to receive this kind of email again in the future."
I believe the email opt-in should be per-user, whereas the setting of whether to share any status information should be per-crate.

---

@newpavlov · 2026-04-17T18:25:34.689Z:
If we are to introduce such status, I think it should be possible to ping it using CI or even periodically update it automatically using last commit date (if the repository field is provided). In other words, if there is some activity in repository usually we can consider the crate as "maintained" even if there are no new releases.

---

@dlight · 2026-04-17T19:07:30.665Z:
I think that this should be a separate state ("maintenance not required") that is distinct from both maintained and unmaintained. I agree that a large number of crates, specially if they have little or no dependencies, are evergreen and require no maintenance.
I think one trouble is that even crates that don't normally require maintenance may require it exceptionally (for example, a compiler bug was fixed but this crate was relying on it - if the crate owner is unresponsive, this should downgrade the crate from "maintenance not required" to "unmaintained")
Anyway all such schemes for signaling maintenance should probably be opt-in. If the author does nothing, it should work as today.

---

@chrisd · 2026-04-17T19:19:05.890Z:
dlight:
maintenance not required
Not to bikeshed too much but I'm not sure I love that phrasing. As you say, some degree maintenance is required. It just might be very infrequent. Admittedly I'm not entirely sure how to word it but "maintenance not required" sounds far too close to "abandoned" in effect. Whereas in this case the maintainer should still be responsive if serious bugs or security problems do surface.

---

@dlight · 2026-04-17T19:21:40.431Z:
Maybe "feature complete" with "bug fixes only"
Well there's many things we can surface about the maintenance status of a software, crates.io will probably only display a subset of the possible information to be presented

---

@kornel · 2026-04-18T03:31:27.146Z:
The problem of "done" crates vs outdated ones is somewhat separate from marking old releases as deprecated or even intentionally marking whole crates as deprecated.
Anyway, it's a common sentiment that projects can be done and never updated, but from my analysis of crates.io data this is a small minority of crates in practice.
First of all, most of the crates that theoretically don't have to be changed, still get updates from time to time. A small tweak, a dependency update, bump of Rust edition, compatibility with a new OS release, or an optimization for a newer CPU. There's still churn, just slower.
Among crates that had no updates for 3+ years, there are some that are really "done" and don't need to be updated, but IMO there are very few such crates compared to the number of old crates that are just out of date, unfinished, and abandoned. Exact number depends on how you define the terms. In my estimate it's on the order of 10-100 evergreen crates that are worth using, maybe 1000 if you stretch it, but that's among 100,000+ old crates.
If you look at this from a user perspective, if they stumble upon an old crate, it's a 99% chance that it will be some outdated abandonware. The sheer numbers create a very strong correlation between old=bad, so it's automatically harder to convince users that an old crate can be fine. It's not the fault of the authors who made the few genuinely once-and-done crates, but their crates still suffer because of that. So IMO giving authors ability to affirm that an old crate is still perfectly fine, and using that to help users filter out abandoned junk, is a helpful service to both users and authors.
When crates.io has 250,000+ crates and quickly growing, it is now a numbers game. Not doing anything about the 99% of crates because of a 1% of exceptions still hurts the few exceptional crates by drowning them in the sea of outdated crates.
(On lib.rs I'm trying to help the "done" crates by having heuristics to detect them, such as whether they are releasing patch versions, how long they've been in development been between first and latest release, and I'm scaling my freshness thresholds to the crates' average release frequency)

---

@mathstuf · 2026-04-21T12:22:40.620Z:
I believe the PyPI name for it is "mature".

---

@lewis · 2026-04-21T21:06:34.487Z:
Isn't this what the badges.maintenance field in Cargo.toml is for? If you set badges.maintenance.status = "deprecated" and publish a version then crate indexing sites will pick up on the crate being deprecated.
As an example, here is how pros-sys, a deprecated sys crate for libpros, looks like on lib.rs: Pros-sys 0.8.1 [deprecated] // Lib.rs (notice how the header has "deprecated" and the crate name is crossed out).
And here are the lines in Cargo.toml which I used to mark it as deprecated.
Since the official Crates.io site doesn't show badges set in Cargo.toml (even though they are part of the spec), I also added an "Unmaintained" readme tag when I was deprecating pros-sys to make it clear for viewers on that website.

---

@KSXGitHub · 2026-04-21T23:13:45.228Z:
Not a real solution imo.
First, crates.io no longer acknowledges it.
Second, this badge deprecate the whole crate.
Most of the time, we only want to deprecate some versions of a crate. For example: A serious security vulnerability suddenly found in the old version. Or the old version has some serious performance pitfalls. Or more.

---

@mathstuf · 2026-04-22T01:52:25.004Z:
It also requires a new version to be published. Making a new release to update the status to "deprecated" or "abandoned" seems like a lot of unnecessary churn (even just considering Dependabot PR noise).

---

@Ltrlg · 2026-04-22T07:37:47.204Z:
KSXGitHub:
A serious security vulnerability suddenly found in the old version.
In this case that version really should be yanked: I do not want that version to end up in my dependencies without wizardry-level commands. If the vulnerability can be qualified as “serious” then yanking is not “way too alarmist”. (It could be a bit too much if the vulnerability relates to a mostly-unused feature of the crate, but this was not implied in your previous message.)

---

@KSXGitHub · 2026-04-22T12:23:01.802Z:
Well, my wording can be improved. But saying "serious enough to deprecate but not enough to yank" is kinda wordy. The point is, a blanket badge cannot serve as deprecating of selective versions.

---

@epage · 2026-04-22T15:55:49.447Z:
Another perspective on deprecating versions is "what versions are supported?".
One way to have our cake and eat it too with MSRV is if people using older compilers take on the cost of also not having the latest versions of dependencies.  I'd love to say "clap's MSRV is 10 versions back but is supported through previous minor and major versions getting critical fixes, driven by those who need them".  The challenge is people will just see "old clap" and not know if it is supported or not.  Having a way to track version support policies for users would be great.

---

@KSXGitHub · 2026-05-08T10:40:56.311Z:
Somewhat related: crates.io: Rust Package Registry
I've never realized how absolutely barebone crates.io was.

=== ROW 175 | f009654 | https://blog.rust-lang.org/2025/04/11/crates-io-security-session-cookies | 2025-04-11 | project-blog ===
crates.io security incident: improperly stored session cookies | Rust Blog
Rust Blog
Rust
Install
Learn
Tools
Governance
Community
🖌
Light
Dark
System
crates.io security incident: improperly stored session cookies
Apr. 11, 2025 · Adam Harvey
on behalf of the crates.io team
Today the crates.io team discovered that the contents of the cargo_session
cookie were being persisted to our error monitoring service,
Sentry, as part of event payloads sent when an
error occurs in the crates.io backend. The value of this cookie is a signed
value that identifies the currently logged in user, and therefore these cookie
values could be used to impersonate any logged in user.
Sentry access is limited to a trusted subset of the crates.io team, Rust
infrastructure team, and the crates.io on-call rotation team, who already have
access to the production environment of crates.io. There is no evidence that
these values were ever accessed or used.
Nevertheless, out of an abundance of caution, we have taken these actions
today:
We have merged and deployed a change to redact all cookie values from all
Sentry events.
We have invalidated all logged in sessions, thus making the cookies stored
in Sentry useless. In effect, this means that every crates.io user has been
logged out of their browser session(s).
Note that API tokens are not affected by this: they are transmitted using
the Authorization HTTP header, and were already properly redacted before
events were stored in Sentry. All existing API tokens will continue to work.
We apologise for the inconvenience. If you have any further questions, please
contact us on
Zulip or
GitHub.
Get help!
Documentation
Contact the Rust Team
Terms and policies
Code of Conduct
Licenses
Logo Policy and Media Guide
Security Disclosures
All Policies
Social
RSS
Main Blog
"Inside Rust" Blog
Maintained by the Rust Team. See a typo?
Send a fix here!

=== ROW 176 | f009657 | https://blog.rust-lang.org/2025/09/01/rust-lld-on-1.90.0-stable | 2025-09-01 | project-blog ===
Faster linking times with 1.90.0 stable on Linux using the LLD linker | Rust Blog
Rust Blog
Rust
Install
Learn
Tools
Governance
Community
🖌
Light
Dark
System
Faster linking times with 1.90.0 stable on Linux using the LLD linker
Sept. 1, 2025 · Rémy Rakic
on behalf of the compiler performance working group
TL;DR: rustc will start using the LLD linker by default on the x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu target starting with the next stable release (1.90.0, scheduled for 2025-09-18), which should significantly reduce linking times. Test it out on beta now, and please report any encountered issues.
Some context
Linking time is often a big part of compilation time. When rustc needs to build a binary or a shared library, it will usually call the default linker installed on the system to do that (this can be changed on the command-line or by the target for which the code is compiled).
The linkers do an important job, with concerns about stability, backwards-compatibility and so on. For these and other reasons, on the most popular operating systems they usually are older programs, designed when computers only had a single core. So, they usually tend to be slow on a modern machine. For example, when building ripgrep 13 in debug mode on Linux, roughly half of the time is actually spent in the linker.
There are different linkers, however, and the usual advice to improve linking times is to use one of these newer and faster linkers, like LLVM's lld or Rui Ueyama's mold.
Some of Rust's wasm and aarch64 targets already use lld by default. When using rustup, rustc ships with a version of lld for this purpose. When CI builds LLVM to use in the compiler, it also builds the linker and packages it. It's referred to as rust-lld to avoid colliding with any lld already installed on the user's machine.
Since improvements to linking times are substantial, it would be a good default to use in the most popular targets. This has been discussed for a long time, for example in issues #39915 and #71515.
To expand our testing, we have enabled rustc to use rust-lld by default on nightly, in May 2024. No major issues have been reported since then.
We believe we've done all the internal testing that we could, on CI, crater, on our benchmarking infrastructure and on nightly, and plan to enable rust-lld to be the linker used by default on x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu for stable builds in 1.90.0.
Benefits
While this also enables the compiler to use more linker features in the future, the most immediate benefit is much improved linking times.
Here are more details from the ripgrep example mentioned above: for an incremental rebuild, linking is reduced 7x, resulting in a 40% reduction in end-to-end compilation times. For a from-scratch debug build, it is a 20% improvement.
Most binaries should see some improvements here, but it's especially significant with e.g. bigger binaries, or for incremental rebuilds, or when involving debuginfo. These usually see bottlenecks in the linker.
Here's a link to the complete results from our benchmarks.
Possible drawbacks
From our prior testing, we don't really expect issues to happen in practice. It is a drop-in replacement for the vast majority of cases, but lld is not bug-for-bug compatible with GNU ld.
In any case, using rust-lld can be disabled if any problem occurs: use the -C linker-features=-lld flag to revert to using the system's default linker.
Some crates somehow relying on these differences could need additional link args, though we also expect this to be quite rare. Let us know if you encounter problems, by opening an issue on GitHub.
Some of the big gains in performance come from parallelism, which could be undesirable in resource-constrained environments, or for heavy projects that are already reaching hardware limits.
Summary, and call for testing
rustc will use rust-lld on x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu, starting with the 1.90.0 stable release, for much improved linking times. Rust 1.90.0 will be released next month, on the 18th of September 2025.
This linker change is already available on the current beta (1.90.0-beta.6). To help everyone prepare for this landing on stable, please test your projects on beta and let us know if you encounter problems, by opening an issue on GitHub.
If that happens, you can revert to the default linker with the -C linker-features=-lld flag. Either by adding it to the usual RUSTFLAGS environment variable, or to a project's .cargo/config.toml configuration file,
like so:
[target.x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu]
rustflags = ["-Clinker-features=-lld"]
Get help!
Documentation
Contact the Rust Team
Terms and policies
Code of Conduct
Licenses
Logo Policy and Media Guide
Security Disclosures
All Policies
Social
RSS
Main Blog
"Inside Rust" Blog
Maintained by the Rust Team. See a typo?
Send a fix here!

=== ROW 177 | f009737 | https://blog.rust-lang.org/2026/04/04/changes-to-webassembly-targets-and-handling-undefined-symbols | 2026-04-04 | project-blog;twir-links ===
Changes to WebAssembly targets and handling undefined symbols | Rust Blog
Rust Blog
Rust
Install
Learn
Tools
Governance
Community
🖌
Light
Dark
System
Changes to WebAssembly targets and handling undefined symbols
Apr. 4, 2026 · Alex Crichton
Rust's WebAssembly targets are soon going to experience a change which has a
risk of breaking existing projects, and this post is intended to notify users of
this upcoming change, explain what it is, and how to handle it. Specifically, all
WebAssembly targets in Rust have been linked using the --allow-undefined flag
to wasm-ld, and this flag is being removed.
What is --allow-undefined?
WebAssembly binaries in Rust today are all created by linking with wasm-ld.
This serves a similar purpose to ld, lld, and mold, for example; it
takes separately compiled crates/object files and creates one final binary.
Since the first introduction of WebAssembly targets in Rust, the
--allow-undefined flag has been passed to wasm-ld. This flag is documented
as:
--allow-undefined       Allow undefined symbols in linked binary. This options
is equivalent to --import-undefined and
--unresolved-symbols=ignore-all
The term "undefined" here specifically means with respect to symbol resolution in wasm-ld itself. Symbols used by wasm-ld correspond relatively closely to what native platforms use, for example all Rust functions have a symbol associated with them. Symbols can be referred to in Rust through extern "C" blocks, for example:
unsafe extern "C" {
fn mylibrary_init();
}
fn init() {
unsafe {
mylibrary_init();
}
}
The symbol mylibrary_init is an undefined symbol. This is typically defined by
a separate component of a program, such as an externally compiled C library,
which will provide a definition for this symbol. By passing --allow-undefined
to wasm-ld, however, it means that the above would generate a WebAssembly
module like so:
(module
(import "env" "mylibrary_init" (func $mylibrary_init))
;; ...
)
This means that the undefined symbol was ignored and ended up as an imported
symbol in the final WebAssembly module that is produced.
The precise history here is somewhat lost to time, but the current understanding
is that --allow-undefined was effectively required in the very early days of
introducing wasm-ld to the Rust toolchain. This historical workaround stuck
around till today and hasn't changed.
What's wrong with --allow-undefined?
By passing --allow-undefined on all WebAssembly targets, rustc is introducing
diverging behavior between other platforms and WebAssembly. The main risk of
--allow-undefined is that misconfiguration or mistakes in building can
result in broken WebAssembly modules being produced, as opposed to compilation
errors. This means that the proverbial can is kicked down the road and lengthens
the distance from where the problem is discovered to where it was introduced.
Some example problematic situations are:
If mylibrary_init was typo'd as mylibraryinit then the final binary would
import the mylibraryinit symbol instead of calling the linked
mylibrary_init C symbol.
If mylibrary was mistakenly not compiled and linked into a final
application then the mylibrary_init symbol would end up imported rather than
producing a linker error saying it's undefined.
If external tooling is used to process a WebAssembly module, such as wasm-bindgen or wasm-tools component new, these tools don't know what to do with "env" imports by default and they are likely to provide an error message of some form that isn't clearly connected back to the original source code and where the symbols was imported from.
For web users if you've ever seen an error along the lines of Uncaught TypeError: Failed to resolve module specifier "env". Relative references must start with either "/", "./", or "../". this can mean that "env" leaked into the final module unexpectedly and the true error is the undefined symbol error, not the lack of "env" items provided.
All native platforms consider undefined symbols to be an error by default, and
thus by passing --allow-undefined rustc is introducing surprising behavior on
WebAssembly targets. The goal of the change is to remove this surprise and
behave more like native platforms.
What is going to break, and how to fix?
In theory, not a whole lot is expected to break from this change. If the final
WebAssembly binary imports unexpected symbols, then it's likely that the binary
won't be runnable in the desired embedding, as the desired embedding probably
doesn't provide the symbol as a definition. For example, if you compile an
application for wasm32-wasip1 if the final binary imports mylibrary_init
then it'll fail to run in most runtimes because it's considered an unresolved
import. This means that most of the time this change won't break users, but
it'll instead provide better diagnostics.
The reason for this post, however, is that it's possible users could be
intentionally relying on this behavior. For example your application might have:
unsafe extern "C" {
fn js_log(n: u32);
}
// ...
And then perhaps some JS code that looks like:
let instance = await WebAssembly.instantiate(module, {
env: {
js_log: n => console.log(n),
}
});
Effectively it's possible for users to explicitly rely on the behavior of
--allow-undefined generating an import in the final WebAssembly binary.
If users encounter this then the code can be fixed through a #[link] attribute
which explicitly specifies the wasm_import_module name:
#[link(wasm_import_module = "env")]
unsafe extern "C" {
fn js_log(n: u32);
}
// ...
This will have the same behavior as before and will no longer be considered an
undefined symbol to wasm-ld, and it'll work both before and after this change.
Affected users can also compile with -Clink-arg=--allow-undefined as well to
quickly restore the old behavior.
When is this change being made?
Removing --allow-undefined on wasm targets is being done in
rust-lang/rust#149868. That change is slated to land in nightly soon, and will then get released with Rust 1.96 on 2026-05-28. If you see any issues as a
result of this fallout please don't hesitate to file an issue on
rust-lang/rust.
Get help!
Documentation
Contact the Rust Team
Terms and policies
Code of Conduct
Licenses
Logo Policy and Media Guide
Security Disclosures
All Policies
Social
RSS
Main Blog
"Inside Rust" Blog
Maintained by the Rust Team. See a typo?
Send a fix here!

=== ROW 178 | f009740 | https://blog.rust-lang.org/2026/04/30/gsoc-2026-selected-projects | 2026-04-30 | project-blog;twir-links ===
Announcing Google Summer of Code 2026 selected projects | Rust Blog
Rust Blog
Rust
Install
Learn
Tools
Governance
Community
🖌
Light
Dark
System
Announcing Google Summer of Code 2026 selected projects
Apr. 30, 2026 · Jakub Beránek
on behalf of the mentorship team
As previously announced, the Rust Project is participating in Google Summer of Code (GSoC) 2026. GSoC is a global program organized by Google that is designed to bring new contributors to the world of open source.
A few months ago, we published a list of GSoC project ideas, and started discussing these projects with potential GSoC applicants on our Zulip. We had many interesting discussions with the potential contributors, and even saw some of them making non-trivial contributions to various Rust Project repositories before GSoC officially started!
The applicants prepared and submitted their project proposals by the end of March. This year, we received 96 proposals, which is a 50% increase from last year. We are glad that there was again a lot of interest in our projects! Like many other GSoC organizations this year, we somewhat struggled with some AI-generated proposals and low-quality contributions generated using AI agents, but it stayed manageable.
GSoC requires us to produce an ordered list of the best proposals, which is always challenging, as Rust is a big project with many priorities. Our mentors examined the submitted proposals and evaluated them based on their prior interactions with the given applicant, their contributions so far, the quality of the proposal itself, but also the importance of the proposed project for the Rust Project and its wider community. We also had to take mentor bandwidth and availability into account. Unfortunately, we had to cancel some projects due to several mentors losing their funding for Rust work in the past few weeks.
As is usual in GSoC, even though some project topics received multiple proposals1, we had to pick only one proposal per project topic. We also had to choose between proposals targeting different work to avoid overloading a single mentor with multiple projects. In the end, we narrowed the list down to the best proposals that we could still realistically support with our available mentor pool. We submitted this list and eagerly awaited how many of them would be accepted into GSoC.
Selected projects
On the 30th of April, Google has announced the accepted projects. We are happy to share that 13 Rust Project proposals were accepted by Google for Google Summer of Code 2026. That is a lot of projects! We are really happy and excited about GSoC 2026!
Below you can find the list of accepted proposals (in alphabetical order), along with the names of their authors and the assigned mentor(s):
A Frontend for Safe GPU Offloading in Rust by Marcelo Domínguez, mentored by Manuel Drehwald
Adding WebAssembly Linking Support to Wild by Kei Akiyama, mentored by David Lattimore
Bringing autodiff and offload into Rust CI by Shota Sugano, mentored by Manuel Drehwald
Debugger for Miri by Mohamed Ali Mohamed, mentored by Oli Scherer
Implementing impl and mut restrictions by Ryosuke Yamano, mentored by Jacob Pratt and Urgau
Improving Ergonomics and Safety of serialport-rs by Tanmay, mentored by Christian Meusel
libc: transition differing bit-width time and offset variants and deprecate bug-prone constants by Adam Martinez, mentored by Trevor Gross
Link Linux kernel and its Modules with Wild by Vishruth Thimmaiah, mentored by David Lattimore
Migrating rust-analyzer assists to SyntaxEditor by Shourya Sharma, mentored by Chayim Refael Friedman and Lukas Wirth
Port std::arch test suite to rust-lang/rust by Sumit Kumar, mentored by Jakub Beránek and Folkert de Vries
Reorganizing tests/ui/issues by zedddie, mentored by Teapot and Kivooeo
Utilize debugger APIs to improve debug info test accuracy and error reporting by Anthony Bolden, mentored by Jakub Beránek and Jieyou Xu
XDG path support for rustup by Guicheng Liu, mentored by rami3l
Congratulations to all applicants whose project was selected! Our mentors are looking forward to working with you on these exciting projects to improve the Rust ecosystem. You can expect to hear from us soon, so that we can start coordinating the work on your GSoC projects.
We are excited to mentor three contributors who already experienced GSoC with us in the previous year. Welcome back, Kei, Marcelo and Shourya!
We would like to thank all the applicants whose proposal was sadly not accepted, for their interactions with the Rust community and contributions to various Rust projects. There were some great proposals that did not make the cut, in large part because of limited mentorship capacity. However, even if your proposal was not accepted, we would be happy if you would consider contributing to the projects that got you interested, even outside GSoC! Our project idea list is still current and could serve as a general entry point for contributors that would like to work on projects that would help the Rust Project and the Rust ecosystem. Some of the Rust Project Goals are also looking for help.
There is a good chance we'll participate in GSoC next year as well (though we can't promise anything at this moment), so we hope to receive your proposals again in the future!
The accepted GSoC projects will run for several months. After GSoC 2026 finishes (in autumn of 2026), we will publish a blog post in which we will summarize the outcome of the accepted projects.
The most popular project topic received fourteen different proposals! ↩
Get help!
Documentation
Contact the Rust Team
Terms and policies
Code of Conduct
Licenses
Logo Policy and Media Guide
Security Disclosures
All Policies
Social
RSS
Main Blog
"Inside Rust" Blog
Maintained by the Rust Team. See a typo?
Send a fix here!

=== ROW 179 | f009755 | https://blog.rust-lang.org/2026/09/22/announcing-a-maintainer-in-residence-scott-schafer-for-the-cargo-team | 2026-09-22 | project-blog;twir-links ===
Announcing a Maintainer in Residence: Scott Schafer for the Cargo team | Rust Blog
Rust Blog
Rust
Install
Learn
Tools
Governance
Community
🖌
Light
Dark
System
Announcing a Maintainer in Residence: Scott Schafer for the Cargo team
Sept. 22, 2026 · Jakub Beránek
on behalf of the Funding team
At the end of August, we announced our first Maintainers in Residence, Rust Project contributors who are funded for their upstream contributions and maintenance work from the Rust Foundation Maintainers Fund (RFMF). Since then, the Rust Leadership Council has dedicated more funds from its Project Priorities budget to RFMF, and together with AWS also providing additional funds, this allowed us to open a new full-time Maintainer in Residence (MiR) position to support the Cargo team. We would like to thank the Rust Leadership Council, AWS, and also the Rust Foundation for providing us with this opportunity! If you would like to help us hire more maintainers to improve Rust, consider donating to RFMF.
This post explains why we chose to support the Cargo team specifically, and introduces Scott Schafer, the new Cargo Maintainer in Residence.
Why Cargo?
The new MiR full-time position is dedicated to helping with the maintenance of Cargo, our build system and package manager. The Cargo project is deeply involved in many new Rust features, improvements, and Project Goals. Combined with its cross-cutting nature, where it has to support many different use-cases and integrate with several other tools, it takes a lot of work just to keep up with its maintenance needs, let alone support so many feature requests and proposed changes.
Because of that, the Cargo team has sometimes struggled with meeting its maintenance demands. You might remember that for several years, it actually held a feature freeze, to reduce Cargo's internal tech debt, perform necessary refactorings, go through the issue and pull request backlog, and come up with scalable internal development and design processes, so that they could eventually go back to even thinking about adding new features.
Recently, some changes occurred within the team, which made it more difficult for them to meet their maintenance baseline. Some members of the team left, while others lost their dedicated funding for working on Cargo maintenance and had to scale down their involvement. The Funding team thus considered it very important to support this team, given that we had an opportunity to do so. And thus we decided to hire a full-time maintainer to work on Cargo for (at least) the next 12 months.
Even though we know that a single full-time maintainer will not completely solve the maintenance struggles of the Cargo team, we hope that it will improve the situation, and provide a bit of a relief for the team.
Introducing Scott Schafer
We are very happy to welcome Scott Schafer (@muscraft) into the Maintainer in Residence role! Scott has joined the Cargo team three years ago, and apart from working on Cargo, he is also the lead of the Rust Docker team, which prepares official Docker images for every Rust version.
Apart from working on general maintenance of Cargo, Scott has implemented Cargo's Workspace inheritance feature, and has also spearheaded a complex multi-year effort to switch the rendering of diagnostics in the Rust compiler to use the annotate-snippets crate. This effort has been completed in the Rust 1.93.0 release. Thanks to it, the same diagnostics interface can now be shared between the compiler and Cargo (and also other tools), which amongst other things unblocked further development of the Cargo linting system, which has now been stabilized and will ship in the Rust 1.100.0 release.
Everyone we talked about was very excited about Scott becoming a Cargo Maintainer in Residence, and we share that feeling. We wish Scott all the best in his new role, and we are very happy that we can support his maintenance work.
Here is what Scott thinks about it:
I am incredibly excited to work on Cargo full-time! There have been so many things that I wish I could've worked on over the years, that I will now be able to get to. I hope that my efforts will bring Cargo into a more maintainable state.
Conclusion
We are incredibly happy that we keep getting more funds for the Rust Foundation Maintainers Fund, which allows us to support Rust Project contributors. The funding team will be working with the supported maintainers, and also the funders, to ensure that they are all happy with the arrangement, so that we can secure stable funding for Rust maintenance for years to come.
If you would like to help us support more Rust maintainers, consider donating to RFMF!
Get help!
Documentation
Contact the Rust Team
Terms and policies
Code of Conduct
Licenses
Logo Policy and Media Guide
Security Disclosures
All Policies
Social
RSS
Main Blog
"Inside Rust" Blog
Maintained by the Rust Team. See a typo?
Send a fix here!

=== ROW 180 | f011133 | https://youtube.com/watch?v=fexqx6bh1OE | 2024-07-01 | talks ===
[00:00]
[Music]
welcome everyone uh and we will explore
uh slint as a rust alternative to qml
for graphic user interface development
and I'm David Vin I'm from felgo and
before going into uh the actual talk
just a few words about what we do at fgo
and myself so at felgo we do development
for uh embedded mobile desktop and web
uh we do development services tooling uh
training and Consulting and
crossplatform HMI ux development we've
been doing this for more than uh 10
years as a cute uh certified cute
partner uh the main office is located in
Vienna Austria uh but we also have
offices in ly and clu in Romania with a
[01:05]
yeah about me I'm David Vin I'm a
software engineer at falo I am from CL
naoka Romania my background is in C++
and qt in automotive industry working
on instrument clusters mostly the
entertainment part and HMI navigation
and the rust High train caught me as
well with Ross being so amazing like I
think everyone of you think like that
that so that's what led me to explore
slint as is really similar to ql and it
can be used with rust so how many of you
actually know about cute and
qml yeah so many so it will be easy for
me I don't need to say that much so qml
is like a cutes modeling language uh
it's a really uh mature language so it's
been around for more than 10 years now
and it's a declarative language uh with
[02:05]
a Json like syntax so you need to add
nodes uh of object in a structure and
you have there the visual uh items and
their behavior with the JavaScript logic
sprinkled on it and this is all reactive
so you have the properties bindings and
Signal handlers and connections to it
and uh the advantages of the qml is that
you can write a single code in ql and
run it everywhere so it is supported for
multiple platforms it is fairly easy to
learn and to use it is fast to prototype
so if you want to do some uh coding you
just need to start up you write a few
lines like you can see there for
rectangle and you are already done uh it
is easy to maintain and all of it is
testable with the UI test and
uh unit test as well but there are also
[03:06]
risks and concerns for qml so uh mostly
they uh performance concerns as the qml
is using JavaScript logic so JavaScript
is mostly runtime interpreted and if you
are not actively working on uh
optimizing your code up front then you
can pretty easily get into troubles
and also you are committing yourself to
the whole uh cute ecosystem and their
tooling and C++ as well and there are
also uh worries about licensing cost for
bigger projects as
well and so we look at alternative and
slint is fairly similar and it's a new
language new toolkit for rust and it was
released the first 1.0 version a year
ago
so uh compared to qml
it's it's really new it's built with
[04:08]
rust and it has apis for uh multiple
languages like rust C++ JavaScript and
even python but that's in Alpha it's
declarative as well similarly to qml but
the major difference is that it gets
compiled to native code so your errors
are caught at build time uh instead of
runtime and and uh this is reactive as
well because you have property bindings
here and you have call backs instead of
signals and you have a lightweight
runtime since it was uh developed with
taking in consideration uh the embedded
systems and I'm happy that uh Oliver's
presentation was before you already saw
and uh know some things about slint and
how it looks how it
works uh sorry so we will compare it a
little uh the ql and the slint and see
what are the major differences and
[05:08]
similarities and how hard is to learn
slint coming from the qml word and
knowing qml so we did this by learn this
learning by doing so we actually
implemented a demo application that you
can see at the felga boot uh it's a
weather application and the home
automation UI uh by implementing an
existing idea there is a uh weather
application written in qml with the fgo
SDK as well available for Android and
iOS and we reimplemented all of this
from scratch using rust and slint uh and
it is a multiplatform so uh available
for desktop uh embedded it is running on
a Raspberry device and Android as
well uh with an Adaptive layout and all
of it is open source so so if you want
to take a look at the code and maybe
give us some uh tips on how to improve
[06:08]
it uh you can find it on the fgd case uh
GitHub repo as a rusty weather app and
you can all always come at the boot
while you're still here and test it
yourself so uh let's get into the actual
uh comparison so the structure of the
code is pretty similar as you can see on
the left side uh there is the ml uh code
and on the right is the slint they are
both producing the same window with a
rectangle in the middle and
uh the slint code is more compact you
can see it on this example but you will
see it later
uh as both of them have their building
blocks the components and the major
difference is that on qml you either
create a new file for component and
Implement there the file name will be
used as a component name or declare the
component type and use that from loaders
Or List use or anything else or Define
[07:09]
it in C++ while in slint you create a
component in the slint files by defining
a component and your component name you
can export this and this can be accessed
from native code compared to qml created
components that are not accessible
easily from native
code yeah for structures structures is a
basic uh building element and there is
support from slint to structures that is
uh defined in the slint code and it gets
uh comp compiled to uh native code as
you can see there this is how it would
look and this these structures can be
used from uh rust or the C++ API
whatever you are using uh slint withd
but for qml it's a little more
complicated because this uh concept
doesn't really exist in the same way you
can mimic uh the structures by adding
properties to a most basic object the
[08:10]
cute object and use that or you can
Define it in C++ and uh adding
properties there so the same way if you
want to integrate your C++ code with
it but you need to write a lot more
boilerplate code that way so yeah the
properties are present in both of them
with uh they are look look they look the
same uh some the read only is the uh out
property the required is in property and
the default properties in out in slint
the major difference is that the uh ql
properties need to be uh well they can
be typed or typeless as well and uh on
slint you need to use either a slint
internal type or your custom structur or
custom type and uh the slint basic type
value has have also suffixes so for
length use the pi uh suffix and for
angle the degrees and so
[09:11]
on and the property change notifications
so what are these uh in ql you have a
signal emitted every time you change a
property like the property counter
change in this case and you can react on
this using a signal handlers like on
property changed and you do something uh
initially when we first looked at the
slint this wasn't there but uh uh
officially so there is an experimental
feature and you can do the same thing as
well here using the uh changed counter
or changed property syntax so it it was
really nice seeing how fast it evolves
because as the first look uh it wasn't
there and we were looking for work
arounds and just then a request popped
up uh and it was there so okay for
functions uh yeah both of them support
functions the major difference is the QR
functions are actually JavaScript
functions and the slim ones are rust
[10:14]
like functions so uh uh the qml
functions are not type you can give uh
any type of input parameters you can
also type it but uh it's unsafe as it
can return anything and it's lazily
evaluated so uh you won't know your your
error uh until you use it run times so
like a function adding two values can
adding one or two can give you back
12 uh and you can mix of integers and
strings as well in slint uh the
functions are typed and you need to
specify the types similarly to rust uh
while defining a function and the return
type needs to be defined as well if you
return something and this is evaluated
at Bild times so you will know if you
functions uh the signals and the call
backs uh they are coming from the same
idea implemented a little bit
[11:15]
differently since
uh in uh qml uh you can declare signals
manually uh or either use the implicitly
declared uh signals for
properties and uh the signals actually
cannot return a value and
uh if declared in qml you can hardly use
it in uh C++ but if you declare it in
C++ you can use it in qml so uh yeah
that's it and uh it what the difference
is that on uh signals you can have
multiple signal handlers so for uh your
signal you can react on multiple places
while uh slint call back is uh similar
to signals uh it but it can return a
value it is uh accessible from native
logic as well easily but can have only
one Handler so if you add a new Handler
[12:18]
it will be overwritten by the new
one as single tones uh people don't like
single tones in general but in UI uh you
need sometimes single ton to represent
the uh actual application state that is
General in the whole application
so KL you either uh Define pragma single
tone in the file that use use it only in
qml or Define your C++ object with some
macros and that can be used from the
whole application while in slint you
export a global component with some
properties and call backs and this can
be accessed globally either from the
native code or slint code and you can
react on this with uh there you can see
some syntax on how you use it from rust
for
example yeah uh for repetition uh in qml
you have this uh
[13:21]
repeater element uh component where you
just give a model that you want to
repeat and times here in this example
you see just a simple rectangle repeated
uh five times and it's similar in both
of them so you have uh the
same idea in slint uh with the four in
Loop looping in a model or a number
where you all both of the codes will
produce five rectangles in these cases
so this pretty
similar uh as for dynamic Ally loading
your components and conditionally
loading and not using something uh in
Cal you have this loader uh type that
can dynamically load other qml
components either synchronously or
asynchronously and you also have
progress tracking that most of the time
doesn't make sense because everything is
[14:22]
loaded instantly if you have bigger
components yeah sure and uh the source
component can be changed dynamically so
for the loader you can actually modify
your component run time and in the same
place it will be loaded another one in
slint you have this conditional element
then for example uh an an if uh
condition evaluates the true then the
element uh your component will be uh
rendered created and but the downside of
this well you can consider it downside
and positive as well that you know it at
uh you need to know it at build times so
you need to actually know you what you
will use it helps you maybe uh not
creating so many bugs in this case as
for the states they are pretty much the
same as well as you define a list of
states application states where uh both
[15:24]
of them uh the difference is that in
slint uh a state is applied when a
condition is evaluated to true and in ql
you can either add a when condition and
if this evaluates to true then that
state will be chosen or you can
manually uh set your States and uh the
state can be bound to property and
modify this uh also uh you can set
transitions for both of them with the
major difference is that transitions in
slint are directly linked to the state
so you have the in when you come into a
state and you when you go out to the
from a state you do I don't know some
animations or uh property modifications
while in qml you need to define a list
of
transitions where you define the uh from
which state you come
to uh What other state and there you
[16:25]
define your animations it is more
Dynamic you can implement
uh some additional uh switches like uh
switching from one state to the other to
behave differently and yeah it's not as
compact but maybe give you more uh
flexibility in this
case so animations are present in both
of them uh ql has a little
more support for different kind of
animations that it's normal because it's
been around for such a long time and uh
uh the major difference is that in um KL
you can
uh manually start an animation and stop
an animation or uh you can apply
directly to the components and you can
have these Behavior objects that
animation will be run when the property
changes this is the slaming slint
[17:27]
because you animate a let's say with a
property and and the animations will be
run when this property
changes
uh but for permanent animations like uh
I don't know a spinner running all uh
while the application is running or
loading you have to use this animation
tick in the property binding so when the
animation tick gets evaluated the whole
property binding reacts to it and that's
how the animation will be run and in uh
qml you can actually give an animation
like looping
infinitely separately so you have
possibilities in both of them to animate
things as for uh renderers and backends
uh for Q qml supports most of them so
you have this cute uh uh rendering
Hardware interface that will actually
render your uh the graphics to either
[18:29]
openg GL Vulcan metal or direct 3D or
you have software renderings and open V
while in slint you have uh the default
renderer for Linux is the it's a cute
based on C painter it's a software
renderer but you also have the vinet
back end uh that can support either
software rendering or F tovi with opengl
and skia as well for the other
platforms
renders uh for translation and
localization
uh QT uses its own internationalization
framework uh that is included with the
whole uh QT package it has several
different tools to handle the
translations like uh generating the
binaries and U managing the translations
files It is Well documented and
supported on all platforms and the
languages can be changed dynamically so
you just get your translation f for
[19:30]
either the code or the translations
which will be compiled in a Qs file and
that is used in the app while in slint
this is a little more
complicated uh at the time because it
uses an external Library uh the G text
which is not supported on Windows and
the platforms that do not have this
library and it has multiple manual steps
and you need to use some uh third party
tools to get the
translations uh here so in this case
maybe K translations is are better
handled as for IDs and the toolings uh
yeah from K coming from the big uh QT uh
you have the cute Creator and cute
design studio for editing and viewing
your K road with dragging and dropping
and you have plugins for the major
editors and uh multiple tools like
[20:30]
squish for UI testing or gamma for uh
getting more into the in depth of what
happening at rendering or uh we have
this felga hot reload tool that actually
reloads your code live as for slint uh
there are also extension for major
editors and I really like the slint vs
code extension way more
than uh the other ones it is as you you
have seen it yesterday it is uh so
intuitive and helpful that you can use
the live preview as well with slint and
see your code modified actually live you
don't need to recompile everything and
uh uh lose your time waiting so
yeah so how hard is switching to slint
coming from qml and what are the
benefits and of it or fitful and
challenges the benefits are that uh
slint is
[21:33]
fast growing you see new features uh and
new releases like uh monthly or two
monthly from what I have sown you have
all the benefits uh that come with trust
as the memory safety you uh catch the
errors build time and you have a great
package manager cargo it is
multiplatform and it is uh really easy
to cross
compile most of you know how easy is
cross compiling rust it has a better
modelization since the code is more
compact you can organize
it better it has API for multiple
languages you don't you are not limited
to C++ you can use rust or other ones
and uh you can integrate it easily with
your native code and the slint viewer
helps you uh write
[22:33]
it speeds up the process but there are
also uh challenges coming from uh qml
and comparing it to qml as you are
lacking some of the extended features
that uh uh qml provides like the
multimedia support is better and uh Maps
or Canvas OR having internal timers uh
like in qml or 3D support and multi
window support are still
in uh progress planned or I'm not sure
some of them if they are planned for
Flint or not and you currently have no
automated UI testing but from what I uh
I had some discussions uh with the SL
guys and I heard that they are working
on some UI testing so this will be not
uh for long until we have UI testing
with slint as well and uh debugging
capabilities because of this is also
limited and you don't have support for
iOS
[23:37]
yet so should you switch to slint well
uh that depends on what you want to use
lint for I would say yes uh if you want
to go with the full rust Solutions
because uh for me it seems that the
slint is the best toolkit currently for
rust and uh and it has a huge potential
in the future uh it has more
predictability compared to qml since you
can find your problems at be before
actually deploying your code and just uh
seeing it live that something is not
working you got the errors at build time
it is
uh it has a better portability since uh
you can cross compile easily you are not
so uh tied to the whole framework like
in uh uh ql case for embedded
development uh it has a really good
[24:37]
performance and uh if you want to be
part of an evolving community and escape
the QT system it is one of the best uh
uh
alternative so that would be it from my
thank you David I think there's one
question over here already did I no did
I see a qu hand go up in this
direction
oh I thank you for the info uh just one
question about the language uh you
mentioned there there's some difficulty
in multilanguage support uh maybe I
missed the details is it uh is it not
possible to switch languages or it's
just harder to get multi language
supported are you referring to the
translations yes yes translations yeah
[25:37]
it is possible in both cases uh to have
multi language support it is more
difficult to implement it currently with
Library any other questions for
David no well I have one um you're
working from qml and you're moving into
or doing qml and slint how are you sort
of doing a transition are you rewriting
codes to sort of eliminate that
dependency that you talked about at the
beginning of your talk or is it just
something that you're now adap or
adopting slint for new development yeah
uh we are mostly adopting slint and
exploring it as alternative so uh to use
it in future project with rust because
it's way easier to use it with rust than
let's say ql where you need to have
bindings to rust so felo is going to
become much more efficient in the future
then yeah I hope so great thank you so
much for your talk D thank you
[Applause]
[26:41]
[Music]

=== ROW 181 | f011178 | https://youtube.com/watch?v=qHcfiCmcIf8 | 2024-11-18 | talks ===
[00:07]
hi hello uh I'm sorry that I can't
attend the meeting in person due to the
Visa insurance I can only share my talk
through the video today I will introduce
my work I have reimplemented Gat storage
and transfer protocol using
rust this uh has enabled me to create a
monor reple engine and decentralized
code collaboration
Network I'm Chima from H I'm also a
board member of the web3 infrastructure
Foundation uh Hong Kong based open
source Foundation that support uh web 3
infrastructure open source project you
can find me on Twitter uh Gmail or gith
using the
Edition uh first let's talk about the
mono
repost uh it just uh what it sounds like
one big folder for all you code SLE is
[01:09]
keeping all you companies working in one
place it's easier to share stuff and
keep everyone on the same page when
everyone's working from the same spot is
simpler to stay in sync but here the cat
uh when it gets too big it can slow
things down now polytical is a different
here you split things
uh each projector gets on space like
giving each team is wrong it's own Ru
this way you can control who see that
and the team can work at their speed uh
but there's a downside it can it can get
a tricky when projects need use the same
folder or parts ensuring everyone using
last the version over everything can be
real
headache uh let's look how Google meta
or Microsoft handle mono repos with
their
[02:09]
companies by January uh 2015 Google's
pepper held uh 186 terabyte was content
with a 35 million commits and over 1
million files pepper is a mass mass code
repository buil on Google instructure
called spender is a spread across 10
Google data centers World while ensuring
global data
consistency Google also integrates a
cloud-based Clan to make it easy uh for
developers to leverage paper uh
capabilities fully however it's
essential to know the paper is not open
SCE M I use a system called sapling to
manage West C base sapling is integrated
with a Ser a server named mono no which
saw code in a database similar to how
Google's paper us spender this Mass comb
combin Circle and ccle light and the
[03:10]
file system backends saing is designed
to handle tens of millions of files and
commit and the L unlike Piper something
is open
source Microsoft creat a scalar is a
focal G to help developers managing larg
repost on their local machines scal as
future like a partial cloning uh
backround Prof fighting and fast
monitoring to improve the gate
experience for big projects scalar
relies on the GFS protocol but well
scalar is there is there isn't an open
source gvfs server
available since G is the world most
popular work control system last casing
using it to house the monor rep G offer
two native solution for monor repos G
subu and sub tree uh SLE the get sub
[04:12]
modu as a one way Link in a mono repo
you can't directly update the repos
within sub modu instead you update them
in their separated posies and then inter
uh integrate uh test deploy uh this
change in monor uh on the other hand G
sub Tre was more like twoe link uh this
all code updates in both the main monor
and the sub
repositories however managing compl
dependency can become tricky with their
others uh if you dealing uh with n Str
it can quickly lead to confusion and
Chaos it doesn't offer an IDE solution
for handling mono repos with a ter so
source code if you want to benefit from
be while efficiently managing mono a
setup similar to Google's paper or Maas
[05:12]
something could be answered by store G
data in a database leveraging the
database distributed fatures you can
create a monal structure that comass the
best both gate and distributed database
synode Gator is a super smart camer F
code each time you make a change it'll
takes a picture this picture is called
snapshot now it doesn't just throw all
this picture you big pad it's more
organizing than that it put things in
different boxes The Blob box is where
the keep the actually stuff you write
your code your text whatever the Tre box
it's like a map showing where everything
goes in your folder so commit box is
where the G right down who made changes
and why to ensure everything stay
[06:14]
organized and security uh get user hash
it's like a unique unique fingerprint
for each piece of data the fingerprint
is calculated based on the data so even
the t is the change will result a
complet different hash this helps give
quickly and and retre the files you need
computers uh even if you try to use a
fancy distribute file system to spread
the load it still struggle to keep up
with all those tiny code changes this
needs to be more overhead and the S
there on any s open source uh distribut
FM design for the G so so what's the
solution uh be company like Google and
MAA have figure out that clar work wrong
they store their source code directly in
database this let them Leverage The
[07:16]
Power of distributed database which are
buil on handle masses amount of data and
keep everything in sync even cross
multiple teams and the locations in
short to T or G minable you should give
up the uh traditional file setlement uh
embrace the power of the database so we
re implemented the G internal storage
using the rest and the developer a monor
engine one developers commit code the
engine decod the transmitted pack file
according the G protocol and store all
the G objects in database when derer
clone the code the engine retri the data
from the database on the pass in the
monor repos repy in COD is and the
return in g pack F
format during this progress we realize
that 100 comp compatibility with the G
[08:18]
would be require significant work to
address this we developed C Tool uh that
work workers alongside with the monor
engine this tools use super database to
closely miror gaze structure ensuring as
much compatibilities as possible while
simplifying integration with the mon
engine we named the open source project
Mega and is available on GitHub uh under
the web instructor Foundation
organization uh we encouraged everyone
to check out give us you
feedback and course uh once me Mees we
well uh Chris Pro is a research project
from nin University of China focus on
[09:18]
anal analing all rest open source
projects on GitHub to recommend the most
suitable cre for the developers this
projects use Mega as the backend uh code
story service St the code be uh analysis
by languaging Mega Cris Pro improv the
efficiency or of reading code during the
analysis
process um both Google and Mega have
robust build system that work handle
hand in hand with their mpos Google use
the Basel uh well Mega has open source
the r based build back two uh we we are
chosen the integrated with back to with
mega uh we are actually collaborating
with gree pro teams to streamline their
d
workflows uh then let's talk about the
decentralized
[10:21]
service gate is the most popular ver
control system have no Central
dependency allowing developers to work
independently with company repository
copies
this make it perfect to distribute the
team developers can work offline uh
making uh making commies and the
branches and the SN lator G flexibility
LS team to choosen between central
coordination and the independent work
geub build on G is a use of friendly hub
for storing and cting on projects it
offer Futures like FK proquest uh and
usure tracking uh making collaboration
easy however being centralized K have
hold significant power over hosted
projects it can access all data and can
take action like uh training AI or
deleting
[11:22]
projects so we want to build a
decentralized the open source cation uh
first we don't want to invent a new wor
control system or change developers
behaving uh so we need a g compatible
host Service as a middle layer with a
decentralized ability uh all G host
servic no connect and no centralized
node exist each service can get pieces
of code from different nodes that it
wants not limited by the get protocol to
get a code from one repository service
is our dat layer second uh when the
developer opens s repository or submits
a murder request the gethost service
broadcast and even compatible with
decentralized social network protocol
like Matrix noer and other and know
subcrib even the tab will be notified at
[12:25]
do what it want it our collaboration
layer we want to simple way to build a
decentralized network so we choose the
GTM uh zero trust model GTM is open
source software that make running a
decentralized network easy it works over
regular internet connection and can be
used on any typ of network one big
benefit of TM is that simple Network set
setup we could connect our G host house
hosting service directly to the GTM so
we didn't do uh qu about compatible
network stuff this free up our
developers to focus on the more
important parts of Omega ctm is a
excellent feed to decentralize network
because it's a scale scale scalable uh
security and the flexible it can handle
larger networks keep data safe with the
[13:26]
incubation and has a modular design and
make it easier to add new files
uh dats helps managing l fils in the
beat but not enough fully address the
challenge posed by the increasing size
of larger language model the track of
this issue uh Mega is developing a
solution beyond the G lfs protocol we
are working on splitting L fils into a
small pieces to delor in them through a
decentralized network this approach make
it easier to handle m files and Ur
efficiency and reable distribution cost
the networking the limitation with treal
uh mes like the
[14:33]
uh we are wrapped our monor repo engine
using Ty turn it into a user friendly
install once the apps run you can push
and pull code directly to your local
monor engine give you complete control
over your code after staring monor repo
you have the option to connect a relay
node with a open source code the network
build uh build using the TTM enable
Network so uh you can publish uh or open
source any directory within your monor
report
[15:46]
uh this information will be broadcast
across the network and uh the Rel no
sharing it with the all the apps so you
so let's see the another app in the
location another uh app can choose
[16:46]
the uh choose to clone your the open
report if the direct Network connect
connection can be established between
the two apps with a all data transfer
happens directly between the if a
director connection isn't possible in
some Network so the data will securly
relay through the relay node using the
encryption
[17:56]
the Ming is a rust based L model app uh
that using the mega to build a
decentralized g distribution Network for
light models uh the goal is uh to shift
the distribution or open sour L models
from a centralized system to a
decentralized one if uh it's exciting
stuff because if it work that could
change how we think about sharing and
exising this power for AI tools it's all
about making Advanced AI Mo
accessibility and the communic
communicated
d uh finally uh here's uh our road map
uh we are currently in the first phase
at the protyping stage and a few
projects and uh open source projects
have already chose Mega as their backend
service we are achieved this thanks to
[18:57]
the uh advantages provided by the r
programming language it's allow us to
focus on more on future development
instead of spending spending uh count
hours Dearing memory
issues we hope more uh R Developers will
take notice of our project and join us
future uh okay that's all thank you

=== ROW 182 | f011233 | https://youtube.com/watch?v=zQgN75kdR9M | 2025-02-26 | talks ===
[00:00]
[Applause]
uh see yeah R rest ands saafe does work
111 can you hear me perfect it's a zoom
moment so yeah excited to hear you and
here in this room so in the first talk
today I will speak a bit about pyal
programming contrust how to achieve
blazing speed and a bit about myself my
name isi the last name is unpronouncable
and I'm a Sen softw in Bloomberg and I
should say in advance I don't represent
all the opinions of my employer of my
employee I'm an employer but it's only
about my personal experience uh in
Bloomberg we love C++ a lot and we also
love trust but I will speak only for
myself and for for life I write mostly
C++ rust bit of python bit of airong hus
a little yeah and I usually work on high
performance systems and infrastructure
tools and usually our work as you know
[01:02]
is about how to move Json in fancy and
highly performant Manner and I got in
PhD and I researched academical stuff
about parallel Computing system
compilers and gpus so it seems like I'm
excited about parallel systems and how
to make things blazingly fast yeah so
let's move uh we will speak a bit about
uh how to improve performance how to
make uh the difference between
concurrent parallel and asynchronous
Computing and what are the high level
Paralis um approaches lowle Paralis
stuff we'll speak a lot about unsafe and
something about the future of gpus so
yeah about
parallel uh so yeah uh let's make a
really small case study let's go with UV
yeah you know UV is modern alternative
for peep for poetry and we initialize
our project we add polers it's a data
frame Library ported from pandas to R
and we get we get rough it's a static
[02:04]
Checker like py and we're on the program
we're trying to get all the crates iio D
with uh data from about all the existing
crates and we're trying to understand
how blazingly fast it here so can you
see where I moving uh so yeah we're
trying to run it and guess how many
bling F crates do we
have 100
person no not bad actually uh it's
humble and Worth to be proud of uh so
turns out a lot of tools we use on daily
Manner and our uh work with different
projects are actually ritten rust yeah
so it's UV polar rff FD if you have for
the shell and also cat is rified
recently with bad cat and I guess you
running in that your favorite editor or
whatever and run it in wob inal yeah and
passive Canal I also read it in Rust it
will be a great talk today with Alis so
yeah let's uh understand why do we have
[03:06]
this syndrome related to rust so first
of all it's only about breaking yeah no
not only it's about how to make our
tools faster and performant and safe at
the same time yeah so we can achieve
more work at the same world time so it's
actually about caring about user and
about users of our system uh that's we
do more work yeah and let's apply apply
a holistic approach how to extract
sources of parallelism on different
levels so first of all uh we get from
the really low level from uh Hardware we
got instruction pipelines in processor
so it means we can do more work with
pipelining stuff here and we also go
super SC processors from um 90s I think
yeah and we got vectorized cmdm so we
can execute multiple instructions at the
same time yeah and we when we move to
the higher level to the task level in
the operating system we have processes
or threads or if you go as a uh language
[04:06]
level Primitives we got green threads in
gvm or inor we go so we got task level
PRM here and at system levels we can
just put an an external accelerator just
near our system and run it on GPU or on
TPU and of course we got distributed
system on a system level so it means we
can utilize message passing interfaces
between uh different components on the
host or even between H yeah so actually
we can extract Paris on different levels
yeah so if you're speaking about
difference yeah it's a subtle difference
but it's really important between
parallelism concurrency and
asynchronicity uh they actually quite
different yeah so concurrency is how to
actually run multiple tasks using the
same processor yeah so it's about this
laser it works so it's how to make one
CPU run multiple tasks at the same time
and it's usually by Contex switching so
processor just get the Trad state it
[05:06]
switches to the another one and we got
uh sud parm and we can achieve the truly
parallel execution only if you have
multiple CPUs yeah multiple cores so if
you speak about CPU it's core or CPU or
I don't know socket it doesn't matter
yeah so it's the only way to have to
have multiple cores because the
execution will be actually parallel and
sync versus a sync it's a little
yeah because synchronous model is is how
to execute multiple tasks in sequence it
could be different functions in the
language or different TRS so we can
actually go from one to other yeah and
with asynchronous model it's about
making stuff interl it in different way
so actually as synchronous versus
synchronous is quite different from
concurrent and Par parallel parallel and
uh we don't need
to have a misunderstanding with one of
them of course too framework can run
with multiple threads so it's a it's a
good sign right and we will focus about
[06:09]
how to achieve parallel program
execution model with synchronous model
so it's a topic for today and for
obstructions we got a ton of them and if
you go from uh the surface to the bottom
of the ocean we can go from really
really high level data parallelism from
Rion and from for example Building C
program in release I hope you don't
forget about it and if you move bit down
we got Primitives to build uh high level
concurrency it's threat PS it's threat
Affinity it's understanding about how
logs work and all the concurrency
Primitives needs to be actually
implemented yeah we'll take a bit uh how
to do it it's about how to build mutant
how to build Lock Free Stuff how to make
a que or Channel and if you go a bit
down to the hardware to the bottom of
ocean uh with no light at all we'll get
to a
Atomic operations at at the processor
level and CMD execution and all the
effects of caches yeah so it's a bit
[07:11]
unsafe in Rust sense so yeah we'll see
how to do it and also GPU it's uh it's a
bit novel for rust nowadays so we'll see
what the state of support is yeah
usually all the layers are quite bit
quite isolated from each other but
sometimes we got obstruction obstruction
leaks oh this works this doesn't oh
sorry
Headway problem they're not concurrent
uh so yeah uh they're not isolated well
but R Developers try to do the best work
to make them isolated and of course we
can compose all of them we have we can
have message passing in the same way
with same optimizations yeah so let's
start with very very high level task
based data parm it's R yeah so it
resembles uh the typical problem with
iterators uh and the only difference is
into par itm so the rest of program is
the same you just change one letter okay
four letters and you can achieve um an
[08:13]
improvement yeah and um the best thing
it's it's not sequential it's uh it's
based on a TR pool so here goes the
magic uh it's a library it's not a
built-in functionality in Rust so it's a
uh more significant uh different uh
difference between uh how other
languages implement for example in Plus+
17 is a part of standard it took only 20
years to get it here so in just we a bit
more lucky and in ja we have streams we
have parel streams it's in language and
different languages they probably lack a
few concurrent Primitives uh so high
level so in R we quite lucky yeah and
how does it work uh we have a trade
called parallel iterator it kind of
mirrors the standard one and to have a
converter uh for from standard operators
uh from standard iterators uh Power brid
and of course we can construct it with
uh only into par me yeah and it has
plenty of methods because it's not a
[09:15]
iterator trade Ryan has toimplement all
of them and I think we got covered with
every case we need yeah and for Random
Access when we know the size of our data
set in advance we can use indexed parate
yeah so if you have this we can pick
this particular
item uh and uh R also offers us a few
specialized methods for example we can
ask for chunks uh so we'll go chunk each
after other uh we can go with a sliding
window and of course we can split yeah
so for example uh for Strings R also
allows us to have a parel string from a
normal string so for example this uh
example will make the parel execution
for multiple lines so we can have B
processing in a really performant way
yeah uh and of course it's also have
sorting and the
main building block of Ryan uh is the
chat pool yeah so all the functions we
[10:15]
see in this slide they are they should
be ideally pure yeah so they don't share
the state because we can do it with
iterators otherwise why do we use them
uh otherwise we need to uh have a
synchronized access with arcs or mut or
atomics and uh it's not not the typical
Fork joint model we can see in the book
uh it's a little better yeah it's a
dynamic balanced Schuler uh so it's a
work steing sched it means uh the data
is not pushed to threads uh so R doesn't
say okay this Trad get this chunk get
the Chunk we get data flowing to trads
yeah so it means HQ has its own uh each
threat has its own q and uh if the tread
for example is free from the load it can
grab another tread data and it can start
processing it yeah so we have much
better performance uh no Stell Treads
better distribution for uneven loads
it's really it's really useful for us
[11:15]
and it's really great Ryan uh Al LS do
it
inside and uh internally internally Rion
is data driven so we have different
models uh so for example usually data
flows from the left to the right as we
write the code and all the steps are
coordinated with heavy Plumping inside
so if you have to implement some
additions it's quite difficult but
usually it's just enough to uh see that
data data is actually flowing to the to
the Treads and uh the main bus building
block is how to split uh the data so you
can use this uh one to make your parall
parate work yeah so join actually do a
really simple thing uh it runs uh two
things in divide and sare manner the
first Lambda goes to the current thread
the second Lambda could go to the
different thread or to uh this
particular Trad because uh we can
analyze how much splits do we need uh
[12:16]
based on the data yeah and if you need
to make a really specific case for your
data you can hint uh the rayon about how
your data is organiz it and of course
the data should be sent because we need
to move date between trads yeah and the
ch of R is of a predate size uh so it
means uh Global Chad pool is created
initially uh because uh when the Trad is
created it's really expensive and Aron
needs to understand how much CP do we
have uh you can override it uh with uh
environment variable or with explicit uh
operator and you can also construct your
own thread pool just to make it for a
specific part of program and how
actually we understand how many CH do we
have here goes the difference between
Linux and Mos I don't even mention the
windows and U actually we're happy that
uh this concept is abstracted by rust
we'll see this a lot of times here uh
[13:18]
Russ tries to make our program really
really uh isolated from platform details
so we can ask how many logical CPUs do
we have yeah and it also applies C grops
so we can understand when we are running
in kubernetes s doing container and it
also counts unfortunately hyper trading
cores and it's F score uh back
in 25 I think yeah uh it's about how to
make uh trads running on the same core
yeah and if you deep dive a little we
can go with the N CPU crate it allows us
to understand how much CPUs do we have
and it can also distinguish between uh
offline and online trats it could be a
difference if you have a really
sophisticated arm processor uh with FL
course Unfortunately n CPUs switch it to
return return all the cores at the same
time so it could be a little different
so if you want to understand it you need
to go back to uh system calls yeah and
uh for physical processors it's a bit
[14:18]
more difficult we can ask about how
exactly uh how much exactly physical
cores or processors do we have and we
should also care about Numa yeah and
Numa is about having different uh
processors sitting in different sockets
so they interconnected
with uh interconnect and in CPU boards
so uh if you run a really really CPU
intensive task you should understand the
difference and the difference is the
Trad could migrate between cores it's
really good because uh developers don't
actually care about how the Headway scal
works but the bad thing we can
experience catch mes and contention and
for example uh let's start with simple
code how to pin a CPU uh to get CPU
Affinity we go to lipy we call the sh
set Affinity so yeah looks nice but
unfortunately uh we need to write unsafe
code um so do we need to stay performant
or safe why not both yeah unsafe doesn't
[15:20]
mean uh your program will in immediately
become unsafe it doesn't uh become C++
code it doesn't shoot to your feet so
it's actually about the developer uh who
is respons possible to ensure the
Environ of the type system yeah and to
interface with system libraries uh lipy
and kernel you need to have un saafe
yeah because all the FIS all the
interfaces between your program and the
system and especially to Hardware are
inherently unsafe so don't be afraid and
uh yeah uh the best advice I can tell is
to isolate as much as possible and save
code and probably to apply uh good
advice about stating uh static
verification and uh itic analysis so uh
we can have all the unfe specific C Rel
related and if you run that program I
specified before for CPU Affinity we'll
get this problem on Mac uh so yeah we
need to handle differences between
operating systems and we can do it with
early handy um thing it's a it's
[16:20]
difference from the C and C++ I like the
most we can do it in code we can
understand which platform do we Target
and which architecture do we target yeah
uh it's a cific FL pass it to our
program and we can utilize it by
specifying okay this function will run
only on Linux and this function is run
only on Mac yeah it means we can combine
all the features we can write a really
tailored code for this specific
architecture and operating system and we
can also utilize uh I'll show it later a
few features so to understand from the
academic level perspective what the
Paralis of program are uh we need to go
to low so the Practical outcome if we
have 10% of sequential code sequential
code in the program we are do it because
we can have we cannot have more speed up
that CH X yeah so we'd like to go to the
this line but unfortunately we're here
or even here yeah uh so we have a lot of
scalability blockers first of all it's
[17:20]
critical section the sequential code
then we got a synchronization overhead
it's about mutes being slow and if you
apply message passing uh we'll also have
some overhead uh because if you grow
with chat count as overhead for
communicating between TR between tasks
uh it's it's it's really significant
yeah and the Lo contention is the thing
if you have only one thread uh with only
one log um it's not a problem yeah but
uh since uh the tread count grows uh and
we have different Treads trying to
acquire the same loog it could be a
problem the Lo contention is a problem
and to understand how to measure it
let's go the to perf yeah perf it's a
Linux utility it's a interface of a
kernel allowing us to understand the
performance counters Performance Event
and the trace events so we can go and
record some stuff for our program or for
CPU and then we can go to the console
and get tons of screens of reports yeah
so this is why uh we usually use flame
[18:22]
graphs it's a invention okay the Brandon
GRE popularized uh the thing so
unfortunately if you want to use it
right now you need to install Pearl and
run a lot of scripts because integration
for FL graphs with per is broken in
different packages so that's why people
had ritten it in Rust yeah so we got
Inferno crate uh which allows us to have
a flame graph for every program uh even
on Mac because on Mac it backs to the D
Trace D Trace is another framework so we
can have our program or our program
profil it with both perf or trace and we
can spot performance blockers so in this
case i profiled a r grab program and we
can understand that this part for
example it takes much more time than
other yeah so actually it's just
visualize the execution time yeah but
unfortunately the problem is with strats
we cannot see the difference yeah
because we can gather all the tra all
the tracks for each Trad yeah but we
[19:23]
cannot say uh the performance of The
Parallel program for this we can go
within naif approach time exists from 17
is if we can go with scientific approach
they hyper fine it's a really handy
statistical Benchmark so if you go the
program isolated as the binary you can
run it and get mean deviations and all
the stuff useful for us and with a
commercial approach drop in V tune I
don't know is it available for open
source but yeah could be a good choice
yeah and the pragmatic approach is to
use Criterion RS it allows us to have
almost the same as hyper fine but inside
the program so you can build a
benchmarks inside the that's yeah uh so
okay to actually make our program fast
we should understand different
approaches it's it's really simple yeah
we can only go with with shared state or
we can go with message passing yeah and
shared State could be achiev with with
SH safe data adopted by mutex and
atomics
and uh let's start with really simple
[20:23]
one if you need to have a CH sa access
to metable object it's only Arc usually
we need to modify them so we go Arc with
mut
you all know what this yeah so it's a
really simple example from the book and
uh we got multiple trads uh we got a
counter which is cloned between uh trads
because clone just increases the
reference count it's really simple yeah
as the downsides of this program and
this approach yeah that uh mutes are
really heavy yeah so if it's contendant
so multiple TR trying to acquire the
same mutex it could go up to 10 and
hundreds of microsc here and it usually
call the kernel and it means it could be
slow yeah more mutes and as rest
implementation of ACD mtic uh it allows
us to have a more lightweight
alternative because it uses the ftic
call uh so it's easier uh to use than I
don't know the pit mtic and if you want
to have a really Advanced mtic
[21:24]
implementation with spin locks and go
for parking lot and if you're trying to
have Ayn mutes please refer to a sync so
yeah the good advice is not to use the
sync mics probably uh so yeah that's the
downsides for mage passing is a second
alternative we communicate just by
sending messages so we don't share the
state we don't use the mute we don't use
M yeah so it's well known in scientific
Computing and in typical approach with
go with Crystal with and it's also a
foundation for the xra model so a very
simple example from the book well I
suppose yeah it's about how to make one
consumer and different producers so we
just push a lot of data from different
Treads and uh we just clone the sender
and then we receive all the data in the
receiver yeah pretty simple uh but
channels go with different flavors so
first of all we have unbounded que uh it
[22:24]
seems uh it doesn't block uh with a
bound that Q it's a different approach
it allows us to have a back pressure so
we can utilize it in uh our business
logic so we don't need to throw a lot of
messages and just allow receiver to go
with it uh uh we can use uh the try
methods and timeout methods to get with
it yeah so type T usually no it's not us
it must implement the sent trade because
the data is sent between Str yeah so the
tals of this is pretty complicated so uh
the channel shares uh the buffer uh and
the registry so it knows when the sendor
is trying to send the data uh to the
buffer when it's uh done it notifies the
register and register says to the to the
receiver okay you can grab this one yeah
and when the receiver completes with
getting the data from the buffer it
notifies the register again and it goes
to the sender okay you can place another
[23:24]
item yeah pretty simple but it requires
a lot different things to be implemented
in channel so so if you need to have a
more advanced stuff like um multi
producer multiple consumer uh you can go
with C beam it's it's really nice
toolbox a nice grate to have it's kind
of nightly for nightly so all of these
structures are implemented first in
Crosby and then they Port it to um to
the standard Library uh so for example
if you want to have multiple consumers
you can go with this or enable nightly
yeah and yeah why use it you'll probably
have a better performance so you will
have extra stuff like tickers alarms and
uh allowing to select yeah and also it's
a foundation for Ron uh for deck is a
work ceing deck you can reuse in your
program if you want to have it instead
of just a simple Fork join yeah and uh
the normal arq which you can share
between threads without using mut it's
[24:24]
really handy use it uh and yeah um it's
not a simple mut uh inside because
otherwise it will be insanely free
uh it's a lock free data structure so it
means uh we have a buffer with prated
buffers prated data slots and we have uh
Atomic indices pointing to head and tail
so all we do we just move the head move
the tail and to do it we need to use
atomics so what is atomic Atomic is a
hardware primitive uh it's implemented
not in Rust not in C++ not in library
it's implemented in Hardware ask the arm
guys uh so it's a very very low level
it's uh executed
only uh with guarantees it's done or
it's not done yeah unfortunately it's
really limited it's only a set of basic
types integer types or or a single bite
yeah so we have a really really highly
platform dependent code in dealing with
atomics so we had we have load store we
[25:24]
have really simple structures like add
some subtract some and of course we have
a foundational structure comparing
exchange so let's see how Ras implements
it it's stable code it's fine yeah uh so
first we go with with flag we can uh
yeah the B SW it's the second one we can
set the flock we can raise the flock we
don't need to protect this with mutex
also we can have uh an operation more
about orink later uh with atomic in and
finally it's the structure we talked
before it um set this value only if the
old value is that specific value yeah
seems Seems like a really complicated
thing but uh it it
is uh so the atomic ordering uh why do
we have uh why do we have ordering it's
thetics uh because uh all these
operators can be reordered with compiler
or even with Hardware so if you want to
[26:26]
implement the dependency between of them
uh you need to go with a releas wire so
you say okay this particular variable um
this store like getting setting the
value it depends uh on the setting yeah
so it means we have happens happens
before relationship if you don't uh you
can go with uh any any scenario right
and of course we have sequential it's
it's not it doesn't use it all so yeah
don't use it uh Atomic operations are
implemented in different ways so in see
it's instrinsic it's R It's s intrinsic
and if you use the good bolt or the
cargo show awesome it's really a good
thing uh because you cannot put your H
program into good bolt so we can see uh
the lock instruction yeah so we run it
for Intel processor I don't know where
is it yeah it's for Intel so it's only
about locks uh prefix and if you go with
arm uh arm is weekly ordered so it means
we get less guarantees about how how
[27:27]
does it work uh and it means if you go
with uh high performance you need to
utilize uh relaxed uh or drink uh but if
you go with x86 it's usually not usually
okay it's always always strong platform
but uh uh the bad point if you run and
test a program on the uh strong
architecture uh you can easily crash on
weak architecture so get the weakest
machine in you can possibly get because
in the terms of guarantees not about the
performance and test with this and if
you're going to on board the mod risk
risk 5 or rep your sofware to graviton
in WS you you should use uh these
Primitives yeah uh so the L free uh
algorithms are actually based on uh uh
this atomics but how about more heavy
data structure about our adjc yeah so we
can have a loing primitive over Atomic
yeah uh so a very very simple example
[28:27]
very simple oh no a simple example how
to implement a lock uh is this so the
core is uh the loog swap uh so we're
trying to uh continuously acquire as a
variable the atomic variable if we
cannot do it we just guilt so it means
we just burn the CPU we go to the
infinite Loop uh and we when we are done
we go with orink release yeah so we just
um clean this flug so uh we must
Implement if it's safe uh Implement ons
safe traits for our mtic so we say okay
this is safe trust me yeah I checked it
uh so we can use uh this structure uh as
a normal muts uh but I think you don't
need to implement it because uh we can
have a lot of problems uh for example uh
the ABA problem about missing rights so
it could resemble your uh some problems
with SQL with transactions uh so yeah
it's it's really similar you can miss
[29:29]
some right bad thing yeah uh so that's
why uh people try to reuse
implementation so in this case go to
Cross Beam go to parking lot and
yeah uh when you should use it if you
have a lot of chats and you have a lot
of locks you should probably go with
lock free data structures if the lock is
uh rarely acquired so the program is not
contented at all you better use the
normal the normal mut with log based
structures because it will uh make your
the h is the whole system the whole host
more performance and you should also
know that uh for channels if you go with
message passing it uh adds some extra
data extra space so it could be
significant if you have a lot of
messages a lot of small messages and of
course implementation is unsafe yeah we
can do it uh without it uh so uh
actually how to measure it uh we can go
with pair of again we can ask for pair
stats and we can ask about uh this
particular tread uh how often it locks
[30:32]
so we have um contentions we have
context switches we have Branch misses
cach misses it's the most significant
part so you can check uh when you uh
develop a program how locks behave in
your particular case uh so we can
analyze it with per stats and if you
need to go with uh more uh more detailed
approach you can choose BPF it's a t
complete program running in kernel so
it's only on SA R running inernal but
also BPF uh so it's simple case of BPF
how to understand when do we lock is uh
to make some hooks uh from the user
space program and we just run our
program and uh we check when each thread
acquires the mtic and when it uh oh
actually when the process is fored so we
make a new Trad pool and when it exes
yeah so for BPF you can check a lot of
different things how to do it it's
really complex but it's really helpful
[31:32]
don't uh don't forget about it and for
locks uh this is the case how to track
the lock usage so for example if you run
only three trads we get uncontended mtic
so this one is ours yeah and if you go
with five trads and 100 locks we get
much worse case so perf lock is is your
good uh good friend for analyzing lock
and tension it's a actually a hard
Choice how to choose a good ruction
level so first of all go with a really
really high level tra tra obstruction
with Tron if you need communication
between uh the part of your program
choose one
fromd uh if you have only one receiver
or choose a channel between different uh
receivers and you can also Tinker with a
do it unbounded Channel really or you
can go with back pressure and if you
need omal access so it's a normal data
structure a normal queue you can check
you can choose the Crosby one and I
[32:32]
think channels h no luck and go with
Flume or Tokyo because it's totally
different thing we we don't Haven
mention Tokyo here or a think and for
looking that struct uh old one air muts
blah blah blah and actually we discussed
a high level Paralis it's about sh tasks
yeah but let's understand what can we do
more uh it's about how to utilize the
hardware the lower level data parm is
about uh how do we ask our system to do
uh the task parallelism inside the
hardware so we don't actually care we
don't use any atomics we don't use any
logs so it's enabled uh in Hardware in
truly parallel manner so uh for this we
have CD single instruction multiple data
so it means we can execute the same
operation on multiple data points uh the
operations are pretty much limited it's
about normal operators add some uh
reduse and the rest here and they're
[33:33]
really really highly Prof process
dependent uh first of all you probably
don't need to write this code because
after theorization is pretty good yeah
the r compiler is based on llvm so you
can utilize all the optimizations from
lvm uh when you just generated the code
so this part is probably handled really
really good by the lvm but you need to
compile it relas yeah it's I think it's
uh pretty obvious and you must help
compiler to do it because if you just uh
slap a bunch of vectors and it wouldn't
work yeah the simpler is better you need
to make uh slices only you need to put
uh preconditions like this uh array
contains at least this amount of uh Char
elements and yeah you should not reuse
the variables so all these cases they
should help you to do this to do after
after vectorization and how can you
check it you just ask you just you just
run cargo aesome on your R code on the
[34:35]
actual program and you check if you have
uh any instructions related to xmm or
amm if it does it does not mean it's
it's performed yeah it's only about uh
it contains some data uh so uh in low
level uh how does it work so we have
stable
API stable doesn't mean un save stable
means it's assign it uh to the Rest
Library and we have a bunch of Str six
uh so we have a type called M 256 and it
relates to the register yeah so the
registers uh here I draw a smaller reg
it's not ymm it's a little smaller
because I don't want to write eight of
them uh one register can contain
multiple data points so in modern
architectures you can have uh even up to
60 elements uh uh in one so uh you ask
Hardware to do operation in truly
parallel manner yeah uh so you have uh
[35:36]
this you load the data uh to the
register then you call the add function
it translates to the to this assembly so
you can spot it in uh assembly code if
you like it to see this it means your
attempt works here and then we get it
back and we get a large uh loop around
this so we can make it in chunks so
actually it's uh even this
it's an abstraction because uh this
doesn't relate to the specific register
because hardware and the good compiler
will translate to operations only for uh
two registers so it adds in place yeah
because yeah why why don't do it yeah
and uh all this uh ring is done by
Hardware yeah so we don't care about it
we just put a bunch of types and loads
to operators
yeah uh so what the state uh in this
year we have stable support for all the
major uh
architectures uh for Intel we have up to
[36:39]
ax2 it means we can we can fit eight
Floats or eight
integers 32 bit integers uh to the
register um ax uh more performant V is
not available because it wasn't
available in Hardware actually uh the
stable neon support for arm is here for
64 and for old one I don't know who use
the old arms but yeah it's nightly so it
means you're you're pretty much good
with Sim support and if you need to go
uh in more abstract way you can use the
portable sy so the portable s is a great
but it is included as a uh STD CMD so it
means we have a pretty good chance to
have it in the standard Library soon
yeah and currently it works best uh with
advanced stuff from R Library like
chunking and it's much more ergonomic
but unfortunately it's nightly only so
yeah as a primitive vibration is to use
[37:40]
a type a normal type uh CD over the
specific type you want to wrap and it
specify the lane count more about Lanes
later and then you can go
with really good R specific uh
converters like from slides two slides
you can even uh pick whatever you want
from uh your array so quite good yeah
and the best part you don't need to
write all the inst strings yeah you
write the safe code not unsafe and you
use a normal operation like a normal
people yeah uh you can multiply add and
yeah that's much much better and uh if
you build it for hell uh for for an
architecture with ax we can see in
assembly uh that we actually use the
registers yeah IMM it means we have a XM
ax and uh we just fire a few few
instructions generated automatically by
portable Sim yeah it's really good and
uh if we run it for for really old CPU
[38:43]
um probably I have it uh in my drawer
somewhere uh how can it work because
it's uh if you if you just run it it it
doesn't have a a white register it only
about
uh 28 bits right so how could it work
and uh actually if you check the
assembly uh we'll see that it uses
normal registers yeah and uh it's a
magic portable Sy uh actually writes our
program to support only specific
instruction set it's really good yeah
and the cdan uh we seen uh in this part
uh it's really it's really viritual yeah
so it doesn't relate to actual uh CD we
yeah uh we usually specify it for 32
so it doesn't matter it's much more
abstract way uh and uh we can also write
a program with normal iterators Zips
radiuses and yeah portable Sy is the
[39:43]
choice next uh if you want to actually
specify for which architecture do
generate code for we use Target Arch
yeah uh and we say okay we'll compile
this program for feature evx and for
specific CPU so usually you want to use
this because um a specific CPU is quite
difficult to specify because you can run
on AMD or whatever you want and yeah the
native is harmful don't use it uh so can
you put the difference between two of
similar actually the first one is
compiled only if we have the feature
enabled in our compiler settings and the
second one generates the code for ax so
it means uh the second function can
contain uh the code specific to this
particular architecture so if you run it
on Old processor we'll have a
crash uh we don't want to have a crash
we don't even have unsafe in our
programs uh so for this we need to go
[40:45]
with a feature detection it's uh it's
really common practice uh for portable
binaries so we can have uh helpers uh we
ask the comp the compiler not the
compiler okay we ask the system we're
executing on a do you support this
particular feature like ax and we can
Target our code for multiple
architectures in the same time and we
can have a multiplexer uh it's a sa
function so we compile this chunk only
for Intel and we roll to different
implementations yeah so for FX uh for
native code and we only have um a
specific function for specific
architecture generating the code for
this instruction set yeah so it's it's
unsafe code rap it and safe rubber so
you can go wrong probably uh still not
blazing fast so we implemented all the
advices I specified so we need to
understand the caches closed Hardware so
[41:46]
if you need to load uh a bite from
memory it isn't loaded like a one bite
we load the whole cach line to the to
the particular core so it means um all
the the rest of excesses for uh
subsequent chunks of memory will be much
faster uh so what could go wrong go uh
if you have a structure uh packet and
memory in a way that different CPUs have
it uh in one Cash
Line will have a problem because it will
be insanely fast uh because each time we
modify the cach line it will be trashed
it will be invalidated for other CPU so
each time you modify the head you add
some data to the structure you'll get in
validation so it's really bad uh how Ras
helps us it helps us with a really good
thing called Cash padded no one save
here we're lucky so it allows us to add
a padding depending on the architecture
so for example for Intel we have U it's
[42:47]
a bit of kill because usually it's uh 64
bytes only but yeah it's for future and
we add some padding and also it allows
us to align the beginning of each uh
data data field the structure uh to to
the specific uh cach line yeah so it
helps it helps us a lot if you writing
or utilizing uh concurrent code please
be sure your uh data fields are padded
and extra techniques uh don't forget
about lto so lto is Linker time
optimization so since we we are using uh
the lvm compiler we can
utilize uh the optimization uh in the
Linker stage so enable it it's off by
default uh for slower build but a little
faster binary you can de paralyze uh
compilation so you can set code gen
units to one code help yeah and uh for
really performance code use in line
because um it's not in line by default
[43:50]
right and uh choose your arithmetics uh
because if you choose uh unchecked ads
or saturated ads you can have some
benefits in really uh performance
sensitive code by the way the checks are
on in nonre builds uh so it means in The
Bu you have a different Behavior so all
check in both the bu and release and
finally uh you could probably go with a
really high level obstruction like a
pure Arrow yeah so it utilizes zero copy
so you don't need to move all the B
between uh file on the dis uh from the
network and you caniz voriz the
execution so we have a lot of uh really
handy Frameworks uh so for example for
data processing for database engines for
example a. flow for inflex DB use a pat
Arrow a lot and uh then let's tackle a
bit what the GPU state so what's the GPU
is the thing you you could buy before
the AI boom and you could uh you could
[44:51]
run uh some games on it unfortunately I
didn't run games in it because I did
research for uh parallel GPU programming
so how to run actual scientific code on
it so it's a massively parallel we have
a lot of uh different execution units
sitting on this GPU so we can uh have a
stream of data and we have a lot of
uh uh this C the course trying to
execute the same operation on the stream
of the data yeah so it's highly parall
it has uh really thousand of processors
so first of all we have specialized
codes running on chip on the actual code
core and we have code communicating with
the GPU so how does it like first of all
it's really complicated we have a ton of
different binary formats first of all uh
code kernels are written in C++ with
heavy language extensions um and then LM
compiler tries to translate to
intermediate representation like mirr in
[45:52]
R yeah and N specific one is a nvvm and
then translated to the binary PTX is
like a binary code in your binary syst
on a machine yeah and then PTX is shied
to the GPU over the network or over the
host connection and then the host
runtime coordinates because GPU is a so
processor coprocessor so you ask okay
run this workload I will wait for it uh
and you can do it an synchronously so
you don't need to wait until the
completion uh so what's the state of the
EOS system first of all if you go with
uh simple R GPU you will find it's a
graphics Library it's not bad but if you
don't need to write some games it's not
for you then you can go with nptx nptx
is the implementation given from llvm to
us how to provide actually the PX code
uh I don't think it goes anywhere
because it's anexperimental and um we
have a much better approach the RAS Cuda
I was lucky enough to spot that in
January it was rebooted and it's really
[46:53]
exciting because it allows us to write
kernels in Rust instead of C++ and it
allows us to have a
interconnection between host and GPU
written in Rust as well so yeah I'm
really excited about this so what's
inside uh first of all it's a native
Rand to emit LM so it actually wraps lvm
compiler and uh we need to have it as a
part of the r c because currently it's
off carel and then it's a hosle kit
usually we use uh C++ run time API in
heavy Coda SDK uh but Cod goes a little
lower and it tries to use uh the driver
API to handle all the communications
between host and GPU and finally the GB
part is a bit tricky because it doesn't
support a lot of different language
constructs so for example imagine if you
have R code able to only add or divide
things oh yeah it wouldn't be so fun
yeah so we definitely need to reach
[47:54]
feuture parity with lvm but yeah if
you're going to check some experiments
with Cod code you can go with J so to
conclude uh first of all start with a
really high level parp structions best
of all is a uh task based Paris not
instruction level Paris so choose Rons
uh with iterators over the pure lambdas
uh choose channels if you want to uh
exchange messages between different
tasks uh so you don't share the state
especially the mutable State choose the
portable syn because it's the cleanest
way how to utilize actually for free the
Headway realism so if you have
arithmetic operations if you have for
example computations you'll definitely
benefit from using CMD and on the then
delve to into the really low level
optimization because rust is a system
language it uh it allows us to have all
the hardware Primitives in our
fingertips so we can use all the all the
[48:54]
features from the processor all the
features from the system we can use any
called you want yeah and then learn how
to customize your tooling how to Target
a specific architecture so you can
tailor the whole binary of the of your
program to be really Hardway independent
yeah so you can have the same binary
running on arm with really high
performance on Intel so yeah that's
really really easy and always measure
yeah don't trust yourself measure with
benchmarks measure with profilers get
some flame graphs and compare compare
compare and finally yeah as I said t
implementations for different
platforms uh so yeah what's through it a
lot of different things uh WR about even
the C++ if you spotted it here it's
really good uh and then you got a lot of
stuff about atomics locks about Tryon
and if you're really excited about how
to develop uh Hardware you can check a
small book from
Intel but it's it's really nowadays you
[49:55]
can just ask Intel okay please can you
send me this uh manual AR guys please
tell me can we have your books for free
as well so I hope we can so yeah thank
you for attention you can reach out for
thanks for the uh amazing lightning talk
um about the uh the GPU specific
libraries um the downside of Cuda is
it's vendor specific as you know um are
there also very good libraries if you
want to uh I know they're behind in
implementation but that might not always
be the case so if I uh if you want to
use for instance AMD Hardware or maybe
[50:56]
even AI accelerators are there other
similar uh libraries available to what's
what's the name could I recall sorry
what's the name uh my name sorry the
name of the library oh no I'm asking I'm
asking you do you know of any do you
know I hope you got some insights about
the new library unfortunately I'm not
aware about this so usually people just
go with C++ code in gpus in kernels and
they just write some glue code in the
host so it's executed only in host
system yeah so almost every case will be
covered with C++ C running on uh the
actual GPU but you can utilize how to
connect it to your program with Ras code
so unfortunately we have not so much
libraries available so Ras probably the
use hello thank you for the very
interesting talk I only found about Ryan
yesterday fairly new to rest I'm
certainly going to use that that's very
exciting
uh because I'm currently working bit in
[51:58]
quantum computation and Quantum
Computing first thing came to my mind
are you planning to implement any apis
for quantum computer calls like q q for
example from Nvidia mhm that's a
question oh
sorry it's it's a tricky uh one
uh so
actually right now you don't have a lot
of a lot of choices how to do it uh so
you need to generate some code uh some
really specific code for GPU you need to
write some glue from the whole system uh
so everything is need to be supported
from the compiler and the ri compiler is
uh is not yet providing all the stuff so
we are currently waiting for support
from the ecosystem from the tooling and
um yeah we can just go and trite our
[53:00]
doing that they Prov
layer it Trans on host
yeah it could be good idea so I really
hope the r after won't implement the
same stuff from Nvidia because it's a
community for it's not backed by the
Nvidia uh so if Nvidia provides it for
as a stable or beta it's a really good
um I had a question about the inline uh
attribute because I was thinking about
it as being a tradeoff between uh
frequently called functions and ones
that are better left UN in line so
what's the when should you use in line I
guess uh if you if you have some code uh
which is on the hot path so you move all
the par parameters between stch frames
[54:00]
uh you will benefit from music in line
always uh it's function yeah so you need
to isolate uh your function by the way
if you place in line always your
analysis with perf or with flame graphs
will be a bit different because if you
omit the frame pointers so if you don't
have actual actual function it will be
impossible to understand uh where is it
so it's hard to to spot uh this one so I
suggest to analyze the flame graphs uh
to see the most cold function and then
inlined I hope I answer the question
yeah hi thank you very much for great
talk um I have a question about
automated parallelization this is like
entire field as well uh in in parallel
Computing do you know any solution
specific for for rest so you simply
provide
[55:00]
the code which is like purely
synchronous let's say huge computation
on a big array and uh you can generate
the the parallel program out of it is
there any solution for that uh uh
generate from from what from from thez
program yes yeah like oh well there is
entire field in in C and C++ and then
quite well working libraries around like
converting synchronous programs into
into parallel programs I'm curious if
something like that uh in C++ is quite
popular so for example usually okay we
the C+ programmers usually applied after
vectorization by placing some random
instructions like pragas and commands
inside the code so it says okay this
Loop is going to be paralyzed please
unroll it multiple times yeah and it
usually goes to to the hints to the
compiler that's how a lot of different
tools work and if you want to actually
generate
[56:00]
code uh I don't know actually will
developers love it it's a generated code
because we are not happy with macros uh
probably it would be masterate but who
knows probably it could be could be a
good idea to check but I highly doubt
that a generated code uh could be could
performance it's only my
opinion okay thank you very much for
your presentation I have a question
about configuration or depending on the
target
architecture I can understand the
configuration is uh powerful for uh uh
to achieve it but uh I guess it's a
little difficult to maintain it uh for
example testing and bench marking and uh
catching up the state of the out CPU
architecture do you have any ideas to
make it easy for the maintenance uh how
[57:00]
to Benchmark it actually yeah uh so uh
usually you have a fixed parameter like
the architecture so you're running in on
a specific machine right uh so in this
case uh the profiling goes to getting uh
some performance counters from Pair
using flame graphs and that's probably
all if you move to another architecture
you have this fixed parameter as well so
you need to only check this architecture
so how to make sure that the whole
program independent
of the specific code for the specific
architecture it's hard Choice probably
it's a good idea to use Criterion and uh
hyper fine just to profile in the end to
endend manner so check
this um hi did you have a view on
profile guided optimization pgo does it
help with automatically inlining
functions profile guided optimization
pgl uh yeah good one uh so the profile
guide optimiz and the profile gu profile
guided optimization P actually it's a
[58:01]
good approach that helps a lot people in
C++ uh and to use it really really heavy
uh so it means you can have a program uh
collecting uh the traces for the first
run then you collect all the data and
then you feed it to the compiler for the
second pass to generate optimized code
so unfortunately I hadn't used it with
rust um probably it's a good idea if you
have a workload for example for I don't
know for beta stage of your system you
can collect the data
with negligible cost yeah and then you
make a really good optimized binary for
the for the production so I think you
can integrate it into your CI pipeline
or testing benchmarks and yeah you can
definitely benefit from this I don't
remember actually how to do PG on Rust I
share ifny will still be around to
answer any questions but uh we now need
to go to break we've got a half an hour
break
um thanks again
[Applause]

=== ROW 183 | f011235 | https://youtube.com/watch?v=-3KKeeZkYog | 2025-06-10 | talks ===
[00:06]
Next up, we have Antonio Pirino, who is
going who's been contributing to the
Rust project in various forms since
2018, and he's going to tell us about
contributing to the Rust compiler with
[Applause]
Antonio. Um, hi. Hello
everyone. Feels a little bit strange to
be again on stage. I think the last time
it was uh many years ago before the
pandemic and I I remember I brought to
the stage you know this project when you
start learning a language and you are
proud to build up a project an
amateurish project but it works. So it
was a it was a talk like that. uh many
years since uh many years later I am
again on stage and in a different uh
[01:07]
role. So uh but what what is my role?
What do I do? Do I write uh do I um I
don't know. I'm in the RAS project. I'm
in the compiler team. But do I write
patches? Not really. not in the main
repository. Uh do I do reviews? Not
really. Do I understand what Michael
said before? Not
much. But uh yes, there is other aspects
um of contribution in the Rust project
that are equally important and uh
necessary even if not always really
visible.
So I started as a as a as Adam said a
few years ago with small meetups,
conferences. It was uh really fun
organizing
[02:09]
conferences and then I got into this uh
working group, the prioritization
working group, which is a notification
group that uh basically keep an eye on
regressions. So when the compiler does
something that it did not we uh receive
a notification there are issues and then
we see what is about so is it bad is it
not should be solved or will be an
accepted
regression. So this kind of work is
ongoing and uh ensures that when the Ras
compiler is released there are none uh
none uh there is no uh nothing that we
want to slip into the stable
compiler. Then the cont all all the
contributors were merged into the
compiler team. So I was kindly kind of
merged into the compiler team since uh
then
[03:13]
um so if there is a sentence that kind
of represents me it's this assigning
priority
uh because this is the core of the
prioritization when we when I when we
look at the at these regressions we have
to
understand how important are they or not
And uh I don't know how many comments
like this I posted. Maybe more than I
can
remember. And
uh so this is not only the only thing
that I do. Uh there are other things
that are ancillary work of the to the
Rust compiler.
uh all these uh acronyms are basically
just uh tools that the compiler team uh
gives to contributors and
newcomers to uh interact with the team
itself. So if you want if you want to if
[04:14]
you have a proposal if you want to get
in contact with the team if you have an
idea the major change proposals RFC are
all tools uh that anyone can use to get
in contact with us. So uh the thing is
that there are many proposals uh so uh
sometimes they get uh they're not they
need all to be followed up sometimes
they are forgotten sometimes the author
uh is not uh replying sometimes we as a
RAS project should provide an answer
this is a a followup that needs to be
done in order to keep things
going. Another interesting thing that I
do is monitoring patches, incoming
patches. Um, this is a bit embarrassing
for me, but I have like a markdown file
in which I do boot uh bookkeeping of the
pull requests that are waiting on
[05:14]
reviews. I have a tool uh in the inside
the triage bot which you are probably
all familiar with that generates a list
of pull requests that are waiting on
reviews sorted by the oldest and I using
uh an advanced tool called
grap I compare this list with this
bookkeeping file and I keep note when
and who was uh mentioned about this pull
request.
Why can not this work be completely
automated? Why do I do this in part
manually? Because uh there is one thing
that is uh that I really care about
working uh while working in the Ras
project. We have on one end amount of
resources. Contributors
uh they have their time they have uh
they um they can allocate only ainite
[06:15]
amount of time and uh we are so I see
them as a precious asset of the project.
On the other hand we have open gates and
we have like an infinite stream of patch
incoming patches.
So and on the other hand I understand
that contributors from external
contributors have expectations. I submit
a patch I expect something to happen in
a reasonable amount of time. So there is
this kind of tension between reviewing
patches and
uh doing them in a reasonable amount of
time.
So what I'm trying to do is to uh keep
uh these pull request being reviewed
being active but not stress too much our
contributors because uh otherwise uh I
annoying. Then we have then we have the
meetings the compiler me the compiler
[07:17]
team has regular meetings. We have a
weekly triage. We have design
meetings which are so depends depending
on the topic. We uh we um review the
past week. We review if there are
regressions. What's the situation? Are
we close to the release? Do we have
things to backport? Do we have
unattended regressions? Who can do what?
So there is this is more or less the
place where we uh where I on one end
summarize I get input from uh
the contributors if I have questions and
I try to summarize everything in a
easily digestible way for the people
attending the triage meeting so that we
can have a glance of what's the
situation
uh we have the design meetings of course
[08:18]
because when there are some topics that
are more
uh beefy they have more substance we
need to dedicate some focused time on
that so these meetings have to be
discussed people get to be invited and
so on this is a also part of my
work of course there are documentation
there are small patches I contribute uh
bit of patches here and there on the
triage bot for example or sometimes on
the tool that we use to biseect code the
cargo bisect which is I guess uh some of
you are also familiar
with and uh yeah now we have the our
documentation thanks to work uh the work
by of David we have the work also on the
forge so now it's centralized with the
documentation of the library team and
the language team and This is important
because because we have one place for
everything.
[09:25]
So, um I kind of see my job a bit like
this power generator in a basement that
does work. Maybe not visible work, but
still uh important because a power
generator gives uh electricity and
lights to the other room where the party
happens. And uh so uh I I feel kind of
part of this group of people working
inside of the Ras project doing work
uh fund let I would define fundamental
work but not very visible like um you
are probably familiar with the
infrastructure team which really uh
literally keeps the lights on and then
uh other there are also another group of
people doing triage of issues and other
pull requests. So we are kind of I would
say swarm of little bees going around
[10:25]
flower to flower and trying to keeping
things tidy and cross-pollinate
everything. So what do I see uh as a
next step for my work?
the this prioritization working group
with has has been uh has never been
exactly what I've been doing since ever.
So learning from the language team, they
have this operation
uh sub team which is TC and I want to I
I thought that we could also have this
kind of formalization of the
work because uh looking at how the
language team works in this respect and
how the work done by TC I think it's uh
a really good things thing to have. So,
[11:25]
uh a couple of weeks, yeah, a couple of
days ago, uh this pull request was
merged. So, there there will be a little
change of uh names and we will have also
this operations team which will be which
should be the entry point for the kind
of work that I'm doing.
We will add some more automation that's
a continuous process. Of course,
everything can be uh improved and
automated. So learning from also the
documentation team, the Rasdoc team,
they for example
uh look at the back ports at the
regressions at the patches fixing
regressions on Zulip instead of uh doing
that synchronously during the meetings.
I like this way of doing uh this kind of
uh this work. So we will have soon also
in the compiler
[12:27]
team. So as you can see I kind of look
at how other teams work and I try to see
if there is something that we can bring
also into the team compiler to improve
our processes.
The other advantage I see is that if we
as a project try to have a more
standardized way of working and
replicate the same workflows and the
same processes across teams. This is a
uh an advantage for the pro for the
project itself because from an external
point of view I am outside of the
project. I look at the project and I see
that more or less teams work the same
way. This is an ongoing work. So, uh I
think I want to do more of this in the
next months.
Uh trying to get uh the teams uh maybe
[13:33]
cohesive. So, uh that's more or less
what I wanted to do. That's a very short
talk. my 15 minutes of
fame. Uh I just wanted to uh say that of
course my work is not uh in a void. It's
not happening in a void. Without every
one of you here it's wouldn't be
possible because I really don't have
context about everything. It's
impossible. So I often have to rely on
each of you when there is something that
I don't understand that something that
is a bit obscure. So uh this is really
uh a community work and I'm really
grateful for each one of you helping me
doing this
uh because otherwise it wouldn't be
really possible.
So uh yeah uh if you're in if this work
sounds interesting if you would like to
[14:36]
know more just get in touch with me uh
you know my handle on
Zulip and uh yeah
um one last thing I would say is that
since we have this uh anniversary of the
10 10th uh year of the release of the
first of the Rust project let's not
forget to party. Uh,
[Music]
[Applause]
and thank you, Antonio, and thank you
for all the work that you do. That was
great.
[Applause]

