=== ROW 184 | f011295 | https://youtube.com/watch?v=8n13Oh8c0r4 | 2025-10-03 | talks ===
[00:02]
Hi everyone, my name is Daniel and I'm
here today together with Zamseek. This
talk is all about the important role
that Russ played in launching secure
messaging, the Guardian's new anonymous
whistleblowing system. And this is also
pretty exciting for us because we we're
now finally able to talk about it after
we spent the last three years um
silently developing it.
And we're sorry that we can only join
you digitally today, but we will be
available in the conference discord
afterwards for any questions that you
might have and for continuing the
conversation. So our talk is roughly
divided in two parts. So I'll start by
introducing the system, why we built it
and how it works. And after that, Zam
and seek will dive into some of the
specific aspects of Rust that were
particularly helpful uh helpful for us
and critical for shipping secure
messaging.
So imagine you discover something going
[01:02]
seriously wrong for at your workplace or
within an organization. You've tried to
fix it. You've used the internal
channels but nothing has worked. So you
might consider reaching out to an
investigative journalist as a source.
But how would you actually do that? This
is what we call the initial contact
problem. How a source can securely reach
out to a journalist for the very first
time. And we know this is a very
difficult problem. For instance, you'll
want to avoid leaving a digital
footprint right from the very beginning
because downgrading security later is
always possible, but upgrading it
retrospectively, that's quite tricky.
And once there is any metadata linking a
source to a journalist, that link cannot
be undone. One solution often suggested
is using anonymity networks like tour.
However, if you the only one in your
organization using to talk, that can
paradoxically
[02:04]
actually make you stand out. And at the
same time, these tools can be difficult
to use for those who aren't so
techsavvy.
Whistleblowers
have been essential for some of the
biggest stories reported over the last
few years at news organizations like the
Guardian. This includes the Snowden
revelations, the Panama papers, the Uber
files.
And the first one is particularly
interesting for us since the initial
contra uh contact by encrypted mail
proved difficult and that led to
significant delays.
And these are all reasons why the
Guardian has built secure messaging.
It's an easy to use, secure, anonymous
mechanism for whistleblowing built right
into the mobile app. And our system uses
what's called cover traffic. So all
installations of the app periodically
send cover messages to our servers which
create some sort of metadata noise
[03:05]
amongst which real messages can hide.
And importantly, by leveraging the large
install base that the app already has,
we have a large anonymity set right from
start.
And therefore, secure messaging can
provide strong plausible deniability for
sources and whistleblowers.
And I brought you some screenshots to
show you how this would look like for a
source. So a user can navigate to secure
messaging either via the app menu or
specific callouts and articles. And we
learned from user studies that inhelp
inapp help pages are super important. So
we've included an extensive help section
and an onboarding screen. This also
means that the user doesn't have to
leave the app and risk creating an
online search history when they for
instance have to Google for an answer.
All liquid data is always saved in an
encrypted vault. And for this, the user
[04:05]
has to remember a three-word passphrase
that's additionally protected by the
devices secure element.
The interactions with the journalist
ideally feel like a normal end to- end
encrypted messenger like signal.
However, there will be a slight delay
before a message is actually sent. And
you might spot that on the third
screenshot that one of the messages is
actually marked as pending. And this is
intentional um as outgoing messages from
a source replace scheduled cover
messages and so they must simply wait
for the time slot.
So how do we get here? U well it was
quite the journey. Um so this all
started even before 2020 as a research
project uh project at the University of
Cambridge involving a research team
including Mansour, Diana, Alistister
Ross and myself. Back then this was
called Coverdrop and we still use that
name when referencing the underlying
[05:05]
technology today.
It started with workshops with
investigative journals and engineers
from these organizations and the idea
was to really understand what are the
biggest problems that they faced and
what are the constraints that a solution
would have to work within. So rather
than choosing the approach solution
looking for a problem which arguably
happens uh way too often in academia uh
we really started by trying to
understand the problem first
and the the output of that which was the
original coverup paper got presented at
the privacy enhancing technology
symposium in 22 and afterwards we got a
message from the folks at the guardian
asking whether we'd be interested in
actually building it. And I mean, we
already had the protocol implemented in
a few hundred lines of Python, so how
hard could it be? Well, it turned out
that taking academic prototype and
[06:05]
turning that into production grade
software is quite the undertaking. And
overall, it took a team of developers
three years until we finally launched in
June this year. And was it worth the
effort? Um that has been a neging
question at the back of our minds for
the entire time. But luckily we've all
been uh generally encouraged by both the
volume and the quality of the messages
that we've been received during the last
weeks.
Let's go back to the um more technical
side of things. Uh let me show you a
simplified diagram of how the system
works. So you see the users that send
cover messages throughout the day and
then there is the cover node which is a
service that lives on premises inside
the guardian building. It is also the
only component with access to a special
secret key that allows it to remove the
outer layer of encryption allowing it
[07:05]
then to distinguish between cover and
read messages.
And that means also that the inner
messages between the source and the
journalist remains end to end encrypted.
So there are two layers of of
encryption.
The cover node then discards the cover
messages and collects the real ones. And
when it has collected sufficiently many
real messages, it publishes a fixed size
dead drop via an API service.
Journalists download these dead drops um
and then try to decrypt all messages in
there and those they can successfully
decrypt are meant for them uh and they
can show them uh to the journalist.
At this point you might be wondering
what all of this has to do with Rust.
Well, components like the cover node are
super critical for the security of the
entire system as it for instance
guarantees the anonymity of the sources.
So we needed to write it in a way that
[08:06]
never violates its core security
constraints while still ensuring that it
can handle a high throughput of
messages. And that's where we found Rust
to be a particularly good fit for the
job.
These are some of the topics that we'll
cover today in our talk. So Sam will
start by explaining how we use the type
system to guarantee the safety of these
critical components and build misuse
resistant APIs
and secure messaging is also different
to other systems as we simply cannot
look into production services that would
um violate its privacy properties. So
Zeke will talk about our approach to
testing and how we keep some level of
observability
um using Rust. And finally, we'll touch
on how Rust's performance
characteristics
made it easier for us to adopt secure
design patterns without overwhelming new
[09:06]
developers joining the team.
In the end, I would say it's all about
making sure that we can still sleep well
at night while working on such a um
sensitive system. And Rust really
delivers here when used correctly. If it
compiles, that generally means it works
correctly, which in turn gives me the
comfort that allows me to sleep well at
night.
So just before we dive into the details,
let me quickly walk you through the full
architecture as this will be important
later. So as mentioned the users send
these cover messages which actually then
go by a CDN to an append micros service
which adds them to a message queue. uh
we use AWS Kinesis as our message cue
and the cover node then pulls from that
stream ensuring that the on premises
service actually don't need any incoming
connections uh which gives them
additional security properties
and from there it prepares these dead
[10:07]
drops and publishes them to an API
service which uses a database to persist
them and then the journalists can talk
to the API service and get their copies
of the dead drops and then try to find
messages
in there by trial decryption. The reply
messages from journalists to sources
work in a similar way. Um traveling via
the API to the Kinesis stream to the
cover node back to the user.
There are some additional services that
we haven't touched on yet. There's for
instance another on premises service the
identity service which is also security
critical as it facilitates key rotation
and signing of the hierarchy of keys.
The most sensitive keys however are kept
on an air gap machine. So that's a
laptop we keep securely in the safe and
it's only accessed for special
ceremonies.
And finally where we can safely do so we
collect logs and metrics to help us
understand uh that the system is running
[11:08]
correctly. So where's Rust? It is
basically in every component that we've
written. And this also allows us to move
a lot of the code into like a shared
crate. Um that later allows these
services to easily talk to each other
because they they understand the same
types, the same serialization, the same
API patterns and that has been extremely
helpful to just have everything rest uh
in the back end.
All right, with those introductory bits
out of the way, I'll hand over to Sam
who will now dive right into the Rust
aspects of our implementation. Thanks,
Daniel. I'm Sam Cutter and I was the
engineering lead on the secure messaging
project at the Guardian. Just to get
everyone oriented, I'm going to
summarize our approach to Rust before
diving into some of the more advanced
techniques we used specific to our
security conscious project. The majority
of our services are HTTP APIs. We use
asynchronous rust throughout a for
handling web requests primarily JSON
payloads anyhow for error handling and
SQL X for speaking to the database which
[12:09]
is usually a SQLite database using the
SQL cipher extension to provide
encryption. These are the basic building
blocks but you might be wondering how we
structure the code to work well with the
specific team we had at the Guardian.
With Rust, you have the option to go for
the most sophisticated blazingly fast
code utilizing lot data structures at
every level of your program and
minimizing allocations wherever
possible. Or you can offer something
like easy mode Rust, which I first heard
articulated by Andre Bergus at the 2024
Rust Nation conference. Easy mode Rust
focuses on writing your code in such a
way that it minimizes a lot of the
complexities that is specific to Rust,
allowing engineers who are less familiar
with Rust to contribute more quickly.
Given that we are the first team at the
Guardian to adopt Rust, we had to be
careful how advanced we chose to go. In
the end, we tried to land on a tasteful
combination of both the extremes. This
is allowing your engineers to get up to
speed as smoothly as possible while also
allowing us to keep the performance and
security advantages that risk provides.
In practice, this means instead of
strrus containing references to other
objects, we prefer our strs to be have
owned types. This minimizes borrow
checker headaches. Instead of lock free
[13:10]
data structures, we prefer to wrap a
readwrite lock with an arc whenever we
can get away with it, which is most of
the time. You can have both great
performance and approachable code. And
at the end of the day, you can always
refactor your code if you need the more
advanced option later on. If you're a
Rust enthusiast at your company and you
want to bring others along, adopting a
tasteful balance of these two approaches
could help get other engineers and reach
out to them where they are right now.
So, that's great and everything, but
what can you do to improve our misuse
resistance? We want new engineers to be
able to join the project and get up to
speed while minimizing the risk of them
introducing new security
vulnerabilities.
The answer is, of course, using the type
system. Rust has an incredibly powerful
type system that allows us to express
constraints on our code and have them
checked at compile time. I'm going to
start with the most basic pattern we
use, the new type pattern.
Our protocol requires that all of our
app users constantly sending messages
from their phone to our system. Usually,
these messages are fake cover messages,
but if a source wishes to share some
information, this cover message is
swapped out for a real one. All of these
messages can potentially be observed by
adversaries while they're going over the
[14:10]
network. So, it's important that real
and cover messages are
indistinguishable.
We achieve this through encryption so
that contents cannot be seen and padding
so that all messages are the same size.
But before any of our security features
are applied, we use compression. This
allows users to provide more information
in a smaller packet, minimizing network
usage, which is especially important in
locations where network usage is more
expensive. We then pad this message to a
fixed size. This is so the length of the
message does not give anything away to
our network adversary. Finally, the
message is encrypted using the
cryptographic primitives I'll talk about
shortly.
This is a representation of the
structure that handles everything except
the encryption. We call it the padded
compressed string.
Since this data is compressed, it's not
meaningful UTF8. So we represent the
data with a heap allocated vector of
bytes. We use a vector rather than a
fixed length array because it works well
with our compression padding libraries
which simplifies construction.
This vector is checked against a
constant size which provided compile
time. If the vector is too long after
compression, we get an error. This is
because our constraints have been
violated. An adversary could possibly
[15:10]
tell a real message was being sent.
The new type pattern allows us to apply
extra constraints to an existing type,
in this case a vector of bytes, and also
allows us to give it a nice name.
That's great, but what about the
cryptography?
This diagram represents our entire key
hierarchy. Each key is signed by the key
above it, providing a chain of trust all
the way to a trust anchor. At the top,
we have our organization key. This is
the most important key, which is used to
infer trust for the entire rest of the
hierarchy. Given its sensitivity and
long lifetime, the secret part of the
organization key is only ever used in an
air sandbox.
The next layer are our provisioning
keys. These keys can be used to create
more cover services and journalists. If
an attacker was ever able to spoof a
valid provisioning key, they would be
able to create a fake journalist account
and potentially trick users into sending
them their secret messages. As such,
these keys are either kept in an offline
air machine or on a well-defended on
premises identity API.
If a leak were to happen, we do have
additional checks and monitoring that
would detect unexpected new journalists
and would alert the team. Next, we have
[16:10]
the cover node and journalist identity
keys. These are used whenever an entity
must prove its identity. For example,
when a cover node publishes a batch of
messages or when a journalist wishes to
update their profile information. This
key prevents other actors from
performing actions on their behalf.
These keys are stored in an encrypted
database that only the private
journalist or cover node has access to.
Finally, we have our messaging keys.
These are the keys that are used to
encrypt messages and other content
defined by a protocol. These keys are
shortlived and much like the identity
keys, the secrets are only ever stored
within the encrypted database that the
specific individual or service can
access.
We primarily use the curve 25519 family
of elliptic curve functions. That's
x25519 for encryption key agreement and
edit 25519 for signatures.
We use a combination of a curve 25519
Dalek crate and a wrapper around lib
sodium which is a popular and widely
deployed cryptographic library.
We chose lib sodium because we need to
deploy our cryptographic primitives
[17:10]
across iOS and Android in addition to
our Linux servers and lib sodium is well
tested and has already been wrapped for
all of our required languages.
Now that I've covered the basics of our
cryptographic key hierarchy, we can
discuss how we use rust type system to
improve misuse resistance.
Two important parts of dealing with
cryptographic primitives is having a
strong understanding of whose keys are
being used which we call the role of the
key and verifying the keys are trusted
before using them which we call
verification.
To implement these checks on the roles
and verification status on our keys we
use a type safe pattern. The type
pattern can be summarized as using types
to represent the state of your program.
Cliff Biffle has an excellent blog post
which includes three things to look out
for when you want to apply the type set
pattern which I'll summarize now. One,
operations on an object only exists when
it's in the appropriate state. Two,
states are encoded into types, attempts
to use these operations in the wrong
state will fail to compile. And three,
types of functions that allow them
transition to other states, adding and
removing certain functionality.
[18:11]
The first type state we have is a simple
marker trait, which is our role trait.
Different keys have different roles,
which infer different capabilities and
lifetimes. We want to prevent developers
from accidentally using the wrong key
for any given operation. We use a define
RO macro to quickly stamp out all of
these roles. But the macro use in our
actual codebase is a little bit more
complicated than the one shown here.
Here's an example of how this marker
helps. We have a function create
journalist which takes a name for the
journalist, some other parameters, and a
key which signs the journalist initial
identity keys proving that the
journalist is valid within our
hierarchy.
In this top example, our admin tool has
attempted to pass in a signing key pair
which is the cover node provisioning
role. So this will not compile since the
journalist function requires a
journalist provisioning keeper which can
be is demonstrated in the second
example.
Next is verification. Remember that we
don't want keys that have not been
verified as trustworthy to be used for
cryptographic operations and we want
this to be enforced at compile time. Not
verifying your keys is unfortunately
quite a common mistake in security
[19:11]
conscious systems and we want to use the
type system to eliminate this risk.
This diagram shows the type states used
in verification of a journalist
messaging public key. We have a public
key that has been sent over the
internet. It has the role of journalist
messaging, meaning it's intended to be
used by a journalist for the purpose
encryption. And even if we think that
this key has come from a system we
trust, such as our own API, we want to
make sure we've not been victim to an
attack such as a man-in-the-middle
attack or an on path attack.
So before we do anything with this key,
we need to verify that signature and
expiry date are valid. If the checks are
all okay, then it becomes verified and
can now be used for cryptographic
operations. If we want to serialize this
key, for example, to save it to disk, we
must explicitly mark this type as
unverified using the toverified
function. From there, we can get access
to our serialization functions. Again,
this is not just used for single
cryptographic keys though. For example,
we use the approach to verify our entire
key hierarchy. This is very similar to
how TLS works on the web where we
retrieve an implicitly trusted anchor
[20:12]
key from local secure storage and then
we use that to verify the entire
hierarchy which will fetch from the API.
The final structure I'm going to talk
about today is our signed form. This
structure is used when a client
application or service wishes to send
some data to another service. Before the
data can be actioned, we need to verify
that the form was truly sent by the
actor who claims to have sent it.
The form has a type parameter that
requires a type can be serialized and
des serialized using the si crate.
They also provide a role type which
represents who has signed the form. This
helps the verifying service look up the
right key to use and helps our type
system enforce that it's done correctly.
Finally, we serialize the type t into a
bite buffer and then sign this bite
array in addition with other information
such as creation and expiry timestamps.
We sign exactly the bytes transmitted
which is good security practice and
reduces risks when verifying the form
compared to other more complicated
approaches to signing structured data.
To give a worked example of form
verification, we can imagine with some
kind of journalist status service.
[21:12]
We first will start with a verified key
hierarchy from before. This key
hierarchy was pulled from the API and
verified using a trust anchor. We now
introduce a status update request from a
journalist. The journalist use a HTTP
post endpoint to send over a form
containing the changes they'd like to
make to their status. You can see here
that the form is wrapping an update
status and is signed using a key with
the journal's identity role.
We take the verify key hierarchy which
due to its verify status can be used for
cryptographic operations.
We combine the key hierarchy together
with the form to verify and wrap this
outer layer. This provides with the ro
update status form body which can then
be sent to the database.
In summary, types give us superpowers.
They allow us to encode the rules of our
system in a way that can be checked
compile time, helping prevent mistakes.
All this is great, but types are not the
end of the story. I'm going to hand off
to Zeke to talk a little bit more about
testing, metrics, and monitoring of our
highly secure and anonymous system.
Hello everyone. I'm Zeke Hunter Green,
and I'm going to talk a bit about
[22:12]
testing and observability for secure
messaging. First, I'll go through a few
testing techniques that we found useful
for this project.
The first one is our use of test
containers. Test containers is a library
that lets you spin up docker containers
during integration tests. And in our
case, we spin up uh docker container per
backend component of the system. So in
CI uh we will build docker images for
these seven backend services and then
spin up docker containers for each and
that lets us run integration test
scenarios like sending a message through
the entire system from a source to a
journalist or having the cover node and
journalists rotate their messaging keys,
that kind of thing. and we found that
very useful for testing the integration
between all of these services.
Uh the next technique I'll talk about is
[23:14]
time travel. So secure messaging
involves a lot of time dependent events.
Uh an example of that is a journalist
creating an encryption key every day. Uh
and that encryption key needs to expire
after 2 weeks. So in our integration
tests, we want to be able to make
assertions about the state of the system
and sort of travel through time to make
that assertion at different points in
time. So the way that we achieve that is
with this time machine which boils down
to two different implementations of a
now function in a time module in our
common library. So the implementation on
top uh will be compiled if we are
running tests and that implementation
just reads a fake timestamp out of a
file. If we are not running tests, if
we're in our production environment,
then the implementation of this now
function will return the current time
[24:14]
kind of as you'd expect.
So then the way we can use that is in a
test like this. So this is an
integration test that will create a
journalist key or rotate a journalist
messaging key. So the first few lines of
this test uh create the journalist key
and publish it to our API passing in the
current time.
Then we can fetch all of the keys from
the API and assert that our new key
we've just created is in the response.
Then we can call our time travel
function uh passing in the current time
plus 14 days and that time travel
function is going to write that fake
time to the file system in each of our
test containers.
Then after that if we fetch the keys
from the API one more time uh the key we
created at the beginning of the test
will now be expired. So we can assert
that that key is not in response from
[25:14]
the API.
Um another uh testing technique is test
vectors. So we want to test the
integration between our backend systems
and the mobile apps. So the way that we
do that is is with test vectors. So we
can add uh this macro call to save test
vectors in um the test we just went
through. So after having created a key
and published it to the API,
we can call save test vectors. This is a
custom macro we've built and that writes
some state to the file system. Um that
state will include the published keys.
So that the response from the API
including all public keys and that file
we can check into version control. Then
after having run the integration tests
we can run the mobile apps test which
[26:15]
will read that state from the file
system. So in that way we're sort of
testing the integration between all of
the backend systems and the mobile apps
um using those test vectors.
Next, I'll talk a bit about our approach
to observability.
So, we use a metrics library to collect
metrics, which we then send to Amazon
Cloudatch, which is AWS's monitoring and
observability service. And then from
there we send those metrics to Graphfana
um to create uh graphs in a dashboard
that our team looks at every day to make
sure that the system is behaving the way
we want it to. Um so the metrics library
uh gives you this facade which uh
provides macros similar to the logging
crate um which let you create metrics
um and it is backend agnostic. So
[27:17]
whether you you're using um Cloudatch or
Prometheus or another metrics back end
uh most of the code to create metrics is
going to look the same.
So here's an example of creating a
metric. So this is in the cover node in
the uh bit of code that is pulling
messages from Kinesis.
So we can call metrics counter to create
a new counter called UTJ messages from
Kinesis and then increment that counter.
It'll start at zero and we can increment
it by the number of messages we've just
pulled from Kinesis. So this is a really
nice little oneliner to create a new
metric in the cover node.
Um this is how we can send uh the
metrics we've collected to cloudatch. We
use this uh library called metrics
cloudatch.
[28:19]
Um and it's just a few lines of code
that we see here in order to instantiate
this back end. So first we uh grab some
uh AWS config from environment
variables. create uh a cloudatch client
and then um initialize uh metrics with
metrics cloudatch. Um we can namespace
all of the metrics we're collecting in
the API with the namespace API and tell
uh the back end to send metrics only
every 60 seconds.
We also use Axommetrics
which is metrics middleware for Axom
servers. So we have a few uh web servers
in the system that are all Axom servers.
Um and this is how we can add that
[29:19]
middleware. So uh here we're creating um
a router for our API and we can add a
bunch of roots like the public keys
endpoint and a few others. And then um
we can add a layer to this router and
pass in the Axom metrics uh default
metrics layer. So this is just a oneline
change to our uh configuration for our
Axom server that will give us metrics on
total requests and the size and duration
of requests and responses and label all
of those by endpoint method and response
status code. There's a lot of really
useful information about the this uh
Axom server
and we can represent that information in
a graphana graph that looks like this.
So it's uh API
requests um
broken down by the status code, endpoint
[30:28]
Like in any system, one of our goals in
monitoring is to assure ourselves that
the system is working uh the way it
should be at any given time. And for
secure messaging, one of the most
important measures of that is uh
delivery of messages from sources to
journalists and from journalists back to
sources. Um secure messaging is opaque
by design in certain ways. Um so that
presents a sort of unique monitoring
challenge. In order to keep sources
anonymous to network observers, we don't
want any information on the timing of
real source messages to go to any third
parties. So that includes AWS or Fastly
etc. Um and really we don't want that
information to leak anywhere outside of
the on premises cover node. And that
means we can't uh add any tracing of
real messages going through the system.
[31:28]
So with that constraint, how can we
monitor the system and make sure that
it's behaving the way it's supposed to
at any given time? Um our solution to
that problem was to create a tool that
we call the message canary, which is a
synthetic testing and monitoring tool
which sends real messages through the
system on a schedule.
This is what the architecture of the
message canary looks like. So the
message canary is running on an EC2
instance in AWS.
Um it's running in production constantly
and sends a real encrypted user to
journalist message once every hour. Um
and then on the other side we're also
simulating a journalist receiving that
real message. Whenever a message is
received, we can create a metric with
the duration of time that it took for
the message to be delivered. Um, and
[32:28]
then we also send messages from
journalists to users in the other
direction.
Whenever a message takes more than 3
hours to be delivered, we can create an
alarm.
So that gives us some graphs in Graphana
that look like this. So on the top we
have the number of undelivered messages
and uh in both directions that number is
zero during this one period. Um and on
the bottom we have delivery times. So
bottom left is the delivery time for
user to journalist messages which is all
uh under an hour and bottom right is
journalist to user messages also under
an hour.
To summarize our use of Rust, as Sam
described, Rust's type system gave us
some very strong compile time guarantees
and our use of the type state pattern
[33:30]
for types representing cryptographic
keys uh make it impossible to use the
wrong kind of key in uh any given
situation.
uh Rust mature ecosystem makes things
like creating web servers, metrics,
tracing, error handling and testing
really straightforward.
And um cargo was very useful in this
project. Uh in addition to it as a build
system and package manager, we used as a
workspace management, testing tool,
formatter and llinter. And that was all
very straightforward.
Um, over to Daniel.
&gt;&gt; Thanks, Zeke.
It's super exciting that secure
messaging is finally live after having
spent the last 3 years developing it.
And from launch day, our back end has
been handling more than 5 million cover
messages per day. And we had a little
[34:30]
silent roll out up to that. That took us
a few weeks.
And pleasingly, we didn't encounter any
significant issues with the Rust
services. they've been just deployed and
ran and all was fine. Uh the only tricky
bits and um bumps in the road were
actually with the mobile apps which were
much harder um also to observe, debug
and release.
And while we cannot discuss any
particular stories, uh I think we can
overall say that we're quite pleased
with what we've seen during the first
weeks after launch in terms of quantity
and quality um of messages and that
makes us all really excited to continue
working um on the project. This project
also has been unique in having started
as an academic research project. it's uh
quite rare that research makes it uh
over into the real world where it has
real world impact. Uh and as part of
[35:30]
this ongoing collaboration uh between
the University of Cambridge and the
Guardian um we also have published a
white paper and you can read that if you
want to learn more about the protocol
details about the the overall
architecture and for instance the the UX
aspects that that uh were quite
important um for the the final product
that we shipped.
And in the same way many insights also
made their way back into the university
curriculum. Um so for instance Martin
Cleman and I we run a cryptography
engineering course and this now
incorporates many of the um ideas that
you've just heard from them and seek
about how to use or how to use types to
um increase misuse resistance of APIs.
And this is because we we we think that
it's really important that the next
generation knows how to use the right
tools effectively to write secure
[36:31]
software and especially secure
protocols.
And finally, secure messaging is open
source. It's available on GitHub and we
also have contact details for
responsible disclosure if you find any
security vulnerabilities.
So this was already a long presentation
but there are so many other interesting
aspects that we simply couldn't cover
today and one is for instance the
generalist client which is the software
that the journalists use and we
implemented that using the Tori
framework which allowed us to reuse even
more rust across different um
components. Um there have been also a
few interesting performance wins that
were unlocked by Rust for instance when
we migrated the appender from an edge
service to a micros service uh running
on a very small EC2 instance and of
course we couldn't cover any of the
cryptography or the actual protocol in
any detail but you will find them in the
white paper
[37:34]
and with that thank you very much for
joining us today even though we couldn't
be there in person and you only see us
on the screen. And a huge thank you to
everyone who has been involved in the
project from the original coverup
researcher team to everyone at the
Guardian who has contributed and
supported secure messaging over the last
three years and we hope to see many of
you in the discord discord channel. Um
please ask any questions and let's
continue this conversations. And with
that all the best from London and thank
you so much for your time.

=== ROW 185 | f011306 | https://youtube.com/watch?v=OWCj8mDbAXc | 2025-10-03 | talks ===
[00:02]
Welcome everyone and thanks for being
being here. Uh we had a previous session
for EV car. There was a demo there. It
all looked very good. But there is one
thing I mean things can go wrong in a
while scenarios. And to debug those
scenarios, we need one very important
thing to be in place and that is we call
it telemetry.
So today I'll be talking about the auto
instrumentation of rest application
using ebpf and open telemetry. Uh the
idea is simple but powerful using the
kernel intrinsics uh to instrument your
users space code without actually
touching that code. So we'll be focusing
main mainly on distributed tracing since
that's the trickiest part if you want to
do auto instrumentation but keep in mind
uh the same concepts we cover here will
also apply to matrix and logs. So the
big so the picture is bigger than just
[01:04]
Yeah. A bit about me. Uh I'm Lit Basin
uh as a principal engineer in Microsoft.
One of the very early contributors to
open telemetry project. I started out uh
in open telemetry open telemetry C++. Uh
started the implementation stabilizing
it and later moved to open telemetry
rust.
mainly because my company Microsoft they
begin leaning on rust for system level
work and company could easily observe
the gap in open telemetry rust
implementation. So since then u I have
been more focused on growing the rust
ecosystem for open telemetry and today
I'm I'm a maintainer for both open
telemetry C++ and open telemetry rust.
uh as part of open op telemetry rust we
also have been doing some early work uh
on auto instrumentation the goal today
is to share the journey what has worked
what have been the challenges things
which have not worked we still don't
[02:04]
have a solution for some of the things
so just wanted to to share our learnings
uh and hopefully inspire few rust and
EVP of developers to really start
contributing in open telemetry
specifically in the rust case.
Uh first of all, I know it's a post
lens, so probably people may be with
Drupy, so just wanted to have an
audience poll. Uh a quick check, please
raise your hand if you have heard about
open telemetry.
Uh thank you. Keep it raised. Uh keep it
raised if you are using open telemetry
in your work or the personal work.
still keep it raised if you're really
using open telemetry rust specifically.
Wow, lots of hands. Uh thanks.
Uh you can just just probably uh give me
a sense of the room and thank you. And
uh for those who are new, I think it
[03:04]
will set up a good good foundation if I
just talk something about open telemetry
before really moving to auto
instrumentation and would be also a
quick refresher for the people who have
been already using open telemetry rust.
Uh
so yeah that's open telemetry. This
definition is coming straight from the
official open telemetry website. Uh the
key idea is that open telemetry isn't a
single product. It's a set of APIs, SDK
and tools. You use it to instrument your
code, generate telemetry signals,
collect them, enrich them, process them,
filter them and then export them to
whatever back end you want to do. And
when I say telemetry signals, I mean
three big ones, matrix, logs and traces.
So at its core, open telemetry is about
giving developer a common standard of
for observability. Uh so you don't need
to rely on a vendor specific agents or
[04:09]
Okay, that's uh a bit more about
telemetry. It's a CNCF project that
univise observability. It started in
2019 uh by merging two existing
standards at that time open tracing and
open census into a single standard.
Today it's backed by around 200
companies, thousands of contributors and
has grown grown into a second most
active CNCF project of Kubernetes. The
scale is what makes it a default choice
Uh again uh some architecture diagram
pulled it again from the open telemetry
official website. Uh so as you can see
in the diagram telemetry uh can be
something which can be generated by your
own application which could be a micros
service uh having tons of different
services. This this uh telemetry could
be generated using auto instrumentation
or could be using manual
instrumentation. It can can also be
generated using the shared
infrastructure which you would be using
probably for your application which
[05:09]
could be a kubernetes or or some proxies
and could be also some external services
like database or some shared APIs. So
all these services they generate a
telemetry
all of them flows into the SDK through
the SDK into a open telemetry collector
which normalize this data into OTLP
format. It further does some processing,
filtering, enriching and eventually
exports this to an right back end for
matrix locks and traces. So I just
mention mentioned uh term called OTLP.
It's an open telemetry protocol. It's a
vendor neutral wire format open
telemetry uses to reliably send uh the
telemetry data to the back ends. Hotel
collector can accept lots of different
formats but it will normalize all those
formats into OTLP before doing further
[06:14]
Uh something about open telemetry rust.
Uh this is the current status of the
open telemetry rust project. uh to
briefly talk about logging API in SDK
are stable. Matrix API in SDK are
stable.
Uh the challenge currently is with the
tracing uh implementation.
The reason is that trace currently
tracing is that we effect we effective
effectively have two different uh
userfacing APIs. One is a Tokyo Tokyo
tracing plate which has been widely
adopted in the Rust ecosystem. The
second one is the open telemetry tracing
API which is uh open telemetry specs
compliant.
So uh they don't uh both of them does
not perfectly align for distributed
tracing. I mean open telemetry
specification really talks about the
distributed tracing and this is how open
[07:14]
open telemetry rest user API is
implemented. Then we also have as I said
Tokyo Tokyo tracing plate widely adopted
somehow not fully suited for distributed
tracing. So the community has been
debating
how how to really interrop with both
these uh APIs whether we should drop one
of them or whether we should continue
using both of them. So currently the
state is that uh both practical path is
to keep both of them active and running
and provide an improved interoperability
across both of them. But I said as I
said tracing API is still not stable.
The tracing implementation is still not
stable. So please don't hold me on this.
This decision can change over the course
of time. uh this is what I mean as of
uh a pick about uh a poor example on how
[08:14]
we can do a manual instrumentation in
open telemetry rust. Uh so this uh on
yeah on on the left side code you can
see how how to create spans directly in
the code. So in this example there is a
parent span with a nested child span
together they form a single trace. On
right side is about how to configure the
application with the tracer provider.
Configure it configure a tracer provider
with a processor with an exporter and
eventually export those spans to be
recorded and sent out to a appropriate
back end. So all looks good. Now imagine
in a large code base doing things this
this for every database call every HTTP
call every service which you are
maintaining uh you will be spending most
of the time doing the telemetry uh
instrumentation
a along with your actual application
[09:15]
business logic. So auto instrumentation
is where it takes the burden off the
developers and eventually that's what we
are talking about eBPF eventually that
becomes one of the important talking
point when we talk about auto
instrumentation for languages like C++
Uh why auto instrumentation?
Auto instrumentation solves three big
problems. First is the legacy systems.
uh it's not easy to really uh legacy
system may not be really instrumented to
send a telemetry data suppose in the
open telemetry standard they may not be
really instrumented at all and it's not
easily easy to add or modify the code uh
to really uh support start supporting
tracing large code base manual manual
instrumentation does not always scales
well for large codebase especially when
we always have a set of standard set of
attributes which we want to uh export
from the entire codebase. Uh cross
[10:17]
language distrib distributed systems uh
each runtime each language has their own
way to store the trace context could be
in a task local as a thread local. uh
it's it's it's a format which is really
supported by the language implementation
and it's really difficult to propagate
that trace context from one language to
other language in case in case the
application is a mixed language
application. So that's that's other
reason where auto instrumentation can
really help out uh to set up the
complete complete tracing pipeline.
That's a typical auto instrumentation
pattern which is used in managed
languages like Java, C# and Python.
So in managed languages, it's relatively
easy because the code runs inside a
virtual machine. Agents can hook into
the runtime, intercepts methods or
libraries and inject telemetry
automatically.
[11:20]
That's why auto instrumentation is so
mature in these ecosystems. And if you
go to the open telemetry uh repo,
GitHub, GitHub or repo, you'll see
specific dedicated repos for open
telemetry auto instrumentation for these
languages. uh but this approach relies
on a VM layer and the native languages
like Rush and C++ does not have that
layer which makes auto instrumentation
bit harder for these languages
and we'll talk about that. Yeah. So
that's that's
the challenge as I just mentioned for
Rust and C++. In the Rust and C++ the
code compiles straight to a native ELF
binary. We are talking about the Linux.
We're not talking about the Windows as
of now and I'll say I'll tell you why
we're not talking about the Windows uh
afterwards. So the code compiles
straight to a native ELF binaries with
no VM in between. You can still see
system calls and functions in the
[12:20]
binaries but the release builds they
will often often strip the symbol tables
and remove the easy hooks which can be
leveraged. there's no runtime layer to
patch into and specifically in the rest
and C++ there's no stable API which
means the function boundaries can change
between the versions of the applications
go some somewhat sit in between manage
languages and rust and C++ it compiles
to ELF binaries but it also have a rich
runtime with garbage collector
scheduuling and go routines so there is
informations
in in the binary which can be leveraged
for auto instrumentation in case of
Golang but that's something which is
missing for Rust and C++ and that's one
of the reasons
uh auto instrumentation for Golang is
bit
more advanced as compared to these rust
[13:21]
and C++ I mean if you go to the open
telemetry repo again you'll see lots of
work already happening for auto
instrumentation of Golang and that's
that's one of the reasons why it's
there.
Um we saw the challenge with for auto
instrumentation uh for native languages
what's the solution ebpf is one of the
solutions. Um and before really going
forward how it can be leveraged just
wanted to give a brief about what
exactly is ebpf. ebpf stand for extended
berkeley package filter. It it you can
think of think of it as a virtual
machine inside a Linux kernel uh that
runs sandbox programs safely. Safely is
very important here. That means that
once that sandbox program we call it as
a EVPF program is loaded into the Linux
kernel, it will never crash Linux
kernel. It's unlike Linux kernel modules
or unlike doing patching in into the
Linux kernel where you had to really
[14:23]
troubleshoot iterate over sometimes the
kernel may crash because of unbound
memory access or any other reasons. Uh
this will never happen in case of evf
programs once they get loaded they are
safe to run inside the Linux kernel.
something like running JavaScript uh
over browser. Browser will ensure that
JavaScript cannot make the operations
which can really harm the system.
It started uh EVPF started very early.
It's it's it's something specifically
for the Linux again that that's the
reason why we're not going to talk much
about the Windows. There is a EVP of
work happening in Windows and I think
hopefully by next year or something we
should be able to talk more about EVPF
on Windows. As of now, it's totally
going to be on Linux. This EBP is not a
new technology. It started in 1990s.
Basically, it was used for packet
filtering. If somebody has ever used TCB
dump that was one of the first tool for
packet capturing, that was one of the
[15:24]
first tool which was using BPF
technology. That time it was uh
specifically for packet filtering. But
over the course of time this has got
evolved and now it has been uh used for
observability and also for security. If
you have a uh like LSM is being using
EVPF
uh EVPF programs are event driven so
they won't run by itself. They wake up
when something happens in the kernel
like a sys call or a network packet
ingress or agress.
So
they they will always run whenever there
is some event happening in the kernel.
The other important aspect is
uh they comp you can just compile the
EVP program once and then you can run it
in any Linux kernel any version of Linux
kernel. The only requirement is that the
Linux kernel should be supporting ebpf.
So it's it's a kind of co compile one
[16:24]
run everywhere and that's that's one of
the advantage. You really not need to
build your EVPF program for all the
kernels down the line. Just compile it
once, create the bite code and that
could be used in across all the kernels.
Uh there are two main components of EVPF
program of EVPF. One is a EVPF program
that's the actual code which runs inside
the kernel. The other one is user space
program. So, eBPF can execute in the
kernel but we need some way to load that
pro kernel program and also to be able
to get the data from that EBPF program
at the user space. So, we have a user
space program which the responsibility
of that is to load the EBPF program to
kernel and then also interact with that
[17:26]
I mentioned that EBPF program will not
run by itself. It will only execute if
there is some state change happening or
some uh some event happening at the
kernel. So these are some of the events
or the hooks where we can attach the
ebpf program. Uh
there is a use uh there are user space
hooks. I mean I'm only covering the one
which would be helpful for auto
instrumentation. There are lots of other
events event types. I'm not just just as
of now I'm ignoring them. Uh so there
are user space hooks. These are urbes
and uren probes. These capture user
space function. So these these hooks can
get executed whenever an application
level function enters and a uren probe
will execute whenever the application
level function exits.
Uh there are kernel hooks, K propes just
like urbopes. These will execute
whenever you enter a system call or exit
a system call. We have trace points.
[18:27]
These are these standard set of already
always available kernel hooks. Uh the
pro the the application can just attach
to that hooks and start using them. We
have network hooks. These are the uh the
two of them are XTP the express data
path uh which basically attaches in the
nick driver at layer 2 at the lowest
layer so that it can basically that's
the earliest level of any packet
filtering which we want to do it and
then there is a traffic control which
can hook at layer three or four so it
can parse the TCP IP packet and it can
do some decisions based on the actual
protocol data at the layer three and
four.
Uh yeah,
so now that we know what ebpf is, how
can we leverage the ebpf technology
specifically in the rust? So there is
[19:32]
One of them is I uh and the other one is
lib bpf rs. I is pure rust
implementation.
So as I mentioned there are two two
components ebpf program and user space
program. Using I you can write both
these components in pure rust. It does
not rely on libpf or bcc. Libf and bccc
are basically more native uh libraries
through which we can implement write
ebpf code but I does not rely on any of
them. Um it does it does not require
require a kernel build or a compile or a
kernel compile headers not even a suit C
tool chain. Uh it just needs a RS
compiler with LLVM back end. Uh it has
experimental CO support. So I mean it
does provide a support but I think this
still experimental. Uh and then the
other one is lib BPF RS. It's a wrapper
on top it's a Rust wrapper on top of the
lib BPF C library.
[20:34]
Um it's uh so in this case we write the
eBPF programs on standard C library and
the R and the user space program in Rust
and the compiler tool chain is CN
um or clank plus LLVM for EBPF programs
and we use a use a standard RS compiler
for user space program. CO is supported
by default.
uh most of the examples which I'm going
to talk here would be lib BPF using libf
BPF RS for no specific reasons uh I know
that there are I maintainers and
developers probably sitting somewhere in
the audience don't please don't judge me
you guys are doing the awesome job uh
it's just that I have used lib RSR and I
just wanted to show that examples how we
can leverage that for auto
instrumentation
Okay. So this is this is
[21:36]
uh the EBPF program
how we can leverage that for auto
the the left hand side part of the code
snippet
this
is the entry probe the probe which we
are adding we have created an probe as
an entry probe to add a bookmark. So
what we do here is we capture a process
ID, we capture the method ID, time stamp
and we create a context.
If this is the root of our telemetry, we
mint a new trace ID. If it's a child, we
inherit a parent trace ID and record the
parent span ID. A fresh span ID gets
generated and it's stored in eBPF map.
EBPF map is as I mentioned it's a way to
send data from kernel space to user
space
[22:38]
also it's basically uh a kind of caching
mechanism inside the kernel space the
right one is the exit probe
this is when the function to be
instrumented exits at that time we
return to that bookmark which we already
already created uh when we entered the
function
So we add the end time stamp build a
span with trace ID, span ID and parent
span ID. That span is uh put into the
into into a ring buffer. Uh and that's a
ring buffer from where the user space
program will pick up that span to be
eventually sent across to open telemetry
pipeline and eventually once that is
done we'll just clean up the state.
So, so together
two probes have been added here. One is
the anti probe and one is exit probe.
And they just don't capture the timing
of this function. They will also capture
the complete hierarchy. Parent spans and
[23:40]
child spans all stitched into a same
trace.
Uh
okay, there are two problems here.
One thing is if you see we are relying
on
the to really maintain the trace
information we are relying on something
called as thread group ID because at
kernel level we only work on on on
thread group ids.
Uh
but in case of async functions this may
not this this of this uh
will not work perfectly because in async
function a given async function can hop
across multiple threads. So if you
really want to instrument a fun async
function you cannot really rely on
thread group ids at the kernel level.
So
okay so now this is a user space
[24:41]
program. Uh we saw the kernel space
program where we created a we created a
complete span hierarchy or created a
span object and we are able to put it in
a ring buffer. The user space program at
the left hand side
it's uh it loads the ebpf program. See
there is something called as load
somewhere called here. It loads this
EVPF program from the disk. It's going
to uh it will load it
into the kernel buffer. It's going to
attach U probes and E pro and U return
probes to the functions which we really
want to instrument.
And then once it has configured loading
the program and attaching the U probes,
it's going to start pulling the ring
buffer. The ring buffer is where the
kernel space eva program is going to
create the spans and write write it
there. So user space program is
continuously going to pull the ring
buffer and it will for any new events
[25:42]
once the new events it's able to get a
new event it is going to use the open
telemetry to create the open telemetry
span out of that and eventually export
that open telemetry span to the back end
where we really want to do that.
As I mentioned earlier, this
code will not perfectly work for async
scenarios.
And this is what uh typical async
code looks like. I mean the
the ebpf only sees thread ids, not the
async tasks.
Rust async runtime moves the task
between threads breaking the simple uh
thread group ID based tracing and
context can be lost unless we find a way
to track logical tasks like futures and
wakers across the thread hops. So in
[26:42]
this example the the the async task may
start at thread one till the uh await
till it encounters a await and once it
encounters an await the the task will be
suspended await would the await IO call
would be executed and it would be
resumed probably in a different could be
in a different thread. So eventually a
single async task may be executing in
multiple multiple threads and that
that's a typical challenge which we have
in EBPF programs as at kernel level we
really don't understand what what
exactly is are the are the task level
a simple example I think Tokyo would be
a very good example to really showcase
uh this state machine and why I want to
share this show this example is that we
can use we can leverage this state
machine for our advantage for EVPF
[27:42]
programs. So let's look look the state
machine.
So initially with the the task gets
spawned I mean task is spawned at the
time it is put in the in the task task
queue
Tokyo spawn API is called task is
created but it's not yet running it's
the task starts running
poll poll is called and it it the thread
T1 is assigned and task is running till
a weight point is reached. When the
await point is reached, the the pole
function exits
with
a pause state with a pause state. Uh and
the and the thread goes and uh and the
thread T1 uh the task is not not not
longer assigned to thread T1. um and and
[28:42]
all the threats are now available for
any any other task to really take it
over.
So the IO await function completes.
Now again
the task is put back into the the
scheduleuler queue from where some other
thread will take it over and that
probably could be the thread different
from the earlier thread and now wake
function is called to ensure whatever
the IO await is completed or Tokyo
weight is called and using that weight
it's put into the scheduleuler queue and
once it is the scheduleuler queue the
different thread say T3 in this is we'll
take it over. It will start running the
poll again and when the when when the
function exits the task exits it will
and and the task is completed.
So what I really wanted to tell here is
that from the state machine of Tokyo we
[29:42]
know that what all functions Tokyo state
machine is calling there is a wake
function there's a pole function if we
can leverage that information to our
benefit to to to ensure to get the that
the
the swapping of the threads
whenever it is happening and if we can
put the probes in those functions we can
get that that information out of out of
the I mean that that the that thread
information from the from those task and
that we can leverage that inside our
EVPF program. So that's that's something
I just wanted to show it here. uh
attaching those probes to Tokyo spawn,
Tokyo pole. Uh whenever the when pole
function start executing, whenever the
pole function exits,
uh Tokyo wake whenever the wake is
called that means this is a time when
this this task is probably going to
switch to some other thread and when
[30:43]
when the Tokyo again uh poll is called
that means the task is going to resume.
So we can use this this is just a pseudo
code here but I just wanted to highlight
that we can use this information to the
benefit
identify that the current task is
running at the at the epf program level
that the current task is running under
So that was one of the challenge. Uh how
the async
will work. Uh there is another challenge
is distributed context propagation. So
this diagram shows the distributed
context propagation. So till now
whatever we have been seeing that's the
inrocess context propagation where we
are calling one function from other
function. uh but the in case of
distributed context propagation the
context has to go out of the network
boundary and auto instrumentation
becomes a big challenge here because now
you don't need to really maintain
[31:43]
context information in a thread local or
task local but you really need to add
that context information in the HTTP
headers while the API calls are being
done. So there is a W3C trace context
specification which talks about the HTTP
HTTP header uh specification that how
that HTTP header should look like and
this is one of the challenge because
using auto instrumentation
using the probes even at the network
level it's not really easy to add
an to append a new HTTP header
specifically with the trace context
information. Uh so this is this is a
challenge here like you in this case
there's a client the HTTP request is
going all the way from client to front
end to back end to database and comes
back and this complete is a one request
flow one trace and we need to ensure
that the same trace ID is flowing across
all these components over the HTTP
[32:45]
header and so that at the back end side
we are able to track the completes
complete trace And there are options how
we can do that. So writing HTTP headers
from EVPF. So this is the challenge
which we have right now. Uh there are
ways of doing it. One of them is BPF
probe write user. This is a BP BPF
function which can be used to write uh
write into the user space memory because
right now what we have to do is the HTTP
header is being created at the user
space. We need to append another header
in the HTTP request. It could have been
created using request create or hyper
crate or any other crate at the user
space. But at the kernel level, we
really want to append another header in
that. And that means we have to write
something in the memory which was which
was allocated at the user space. So
there is a function PBP BPF probe write
user
something was easy to leverage that to
[33:47]
really add a new new header to the HTTP
but the problem was this was some this
was something locked down in August 2021
EBPF does not really support that
anymore. Um the one of the reasons for
locking it down was the security
concerns uh at the at the kernel level
any other any program should not be able
to write something in the user memory
and another issue was that there was not
a very clear use case scenario apart
from auto instrumentation to use this
function and I think the trade-offs were
more than actual use case in this case
so this is not really available anymore
now there is something called BPF BPF
arena which provides the unstructured
flag memory shared across both user and
kernel space.
This is something which could have been
used but the problem is whenever the
EVPF programs is loaded this memory gets
zero initialized. What it means that uh
[34:48]
if that memory h already has some HTTP
headers allocated through the request
create as as soon as we load this
program that memory will get zeroed out.
So this can that can result at the user
space program to really crash or any
undefined behavior can happen.
Level four context propagation is
something another aspect which can be
that works fine but the problem here is
that it will not work
with level 7 proxies like engineix or
any other proxy at level 7 running
because they proxies also have to be
instrumented using the same way we are
instrumenting our endpoints that's not
always possible again level seven
context propagation using HTTP is
another solution but the problem here is
that encryption
prevents reading and writing at level
seven.
Another option is library interposition.
[35:50]
Library interposition or patching. This
is this is more traditional way. This
has been done till now. uh a non MBPF
way of doing is to hijack the calls to
lip curl, lip SSL,
lipy and basically
trying to write uh to to run your own
code your own code whenever say SSL
write or SSL read is being done and that
code really that that intercepted code
can really
write into the the header information.
Um so we can use LD preload for that
works great and I think lots of times I
have seen uh people using that the only
problem it becomes is that in case in
case these libraries which have to be
intercepted are statically compiled with
your application it's not that easy to
really intercept them and needs more
more uh patching and becomes bit messy.
[36:51]
So yeah so
that's that's one of the challenge uh
no right way of doing this uh for at
least the uh context propagation across
the network.
Some of these way some of these ways may
work but there is no one all good
solution uh as of now for context
propagation in the dist distributed
scenarios.
Uh probably I just skip it. I think this
is some talks about the same context
propagation.
Yeah. General requirements limitations
of EVPFU probes. One of the one of the
basic requirement is that the target
function which we want to auto
instrument should not be inlined should
not be a macro in those cases these
would be compiled out and we really
won't see at the kernel level and they
cannot be instrumented
functions symbol table should be there
that's the must requirement without
[37:51]
symbol tables we won't be able to
instrument these functions
there is possibility of doing offset b
offset based attachment
in general But that's a fragile and
mostly not recommended. Uh so yeah this
these are some some of the basic
requirements if we want to leverage the
EVPF for auto instrumentation
state of EVPF based in instrumentation
in open telemetry. As I mentioned
earlier that Golang is one of more
mature in terms of
in auto instrumentation. We already have
go auto instrumentation
work happening. um in in open telemetry
it uses ebpf to trace the go application
without any code changes works good lot
lots of go to work is happening in this
for a long time bail already has a
multi- language epf agent
uh there was a proposal to donate uh
by graphfana lab so baila is one of one
[38:53]
of their multil- language epf agent and
the plan was to really donate it to
graphana to open telemetry it's already
done I think it's already part of the
open telemetry project. uh it's more
language agnostic protocol level still
very limited when we talk about rush and
C++ it does not really support at that
level
there is a eBPF sig special interest
group uh which talks more about
collecting the kernel level telemetry
more in terms of profiling the kernel
level
uh so so there is some work happening in
at eBPF in open telemetry
I'll say not much in Rust or more native
Rust and C++. So that that's something I
think we are probably lagging and
really look forward to make it more
mature
and I had a demo but I think probably
I'll be sharing it the setup over the
discord. I think it was slightly
complicated setup to really come up
[39:54]
here. uh if there is an interest
probably I can share it across the
discord so people can really try to see
how it runs.
Uh
thank you. Uh I'm reachable over the
discord or even the discord channel for
this session. So please connect me
there.
[Applause]

=== ROW 186 | f011312 | https://youtube.com/watch?v=Z5M4NIWoMJQ | 2025-10-03 | talks ===
[00:03]
Hey everyone, I'm Taylor. I work on Rust
and C++ interop at Google.
&gt;&gt; Hi, I'm Tyler. I co-lead the Rust
language design team and I also work at
Google.
&gt;&gt; Uh Taylor and I are so excited to
announce here on stage for the very
first time that
&gt;&gt; contrary to popular belief, we're not
&gt;&gt; Anyway, we're at Rest Comp. So, uh let's
talk about Rust.
Rust is a systems programming language.
&gt;&gt; No, no, stop. We're we're at Rustcon.
Everyone here already knows that Rust
provides memory safety, fearless
concurrency, and has been voted Stack
Overflow users most loved language nine
years in a row.
Rust evangelism strike force, Tyler.
Really? All right, let's talk about C++.
According to the TIOB index, C++ is the
second most used language only after
Python. Despite growing calls for modern
memory safe programming languages,
[01:03]
developers are still writing nearly 20
times as much C and C++ code as R code.
The popularity of C and C++ combined
with their long history of usage
throughout the systems programming world
means that an overwhelming proportion of
large existing code bases and APIs are
expressed in C and C++. But if you're an
advocate of memory safety, don't
despair. The good news is that even if
your codebase is mostly C++, you you
don't have to rewrite it all to make
substantial gains in memory safety and
reliability.
So most bugs and vulnerabilities arise
in new code and they decay exponentially
with time after that. This is actually
well supported in research. So you heard
me, you don't have to rewrite it all in
Rust.
You can actually achieve a major
reduction in bugs and vulnerabilities uh
by using Rust to implement new features,
but that can be hard to do.
It isn't as easy as choosing to write a
[02:14]
This is a problem even for code bases
which do want to migrate to 100% R. For
even a moderately sized project, it
won't be feasible to convert everything
to Rust all at once. So there will be a
period of time during the migration
where C++ and Rust code have to
interact.
For example, the fish shell recently
completed its migration from C++ to
Rust. They were having a rough time
using C++ due to its inconsistent
tooling and platform support, poor
ergonomics, threading hazards, and a
disjoint community. They were excited to
use Rust. It's cool. It's fun. It
provides great tooling and an excellent
community. So they set out to port fish
from C++ to Rust.
In order to accomplish this port, they
needed to migrate components one by one
from C++ over to REST. They described
this gradual migration as a necessity.
Without a gradual migration, they
wouldn't have had a working program for
months. they might not have finished at
all and they would have had to redo a
[03:14]
bunch of work once the uh project became
testable after conversion. However, this
plan hit a snag. Rust and C++ interop.
Today, the situation is messy and the
tooling is limited in what it can
handle. In the end, they managed to pull
off the conversion thanks to some
developer heroics porting modules
sometimes as large as 13,000 lines of
code all at once. These developers were
determined to see it through the
transition and they didn't have a boss
hovering over their shoulder during the
port bugging them about when it was
going to be done. Not every project has
that luxury.
Most projects don't, which means if they
want to use Rust, they're kind of stuck.
Now, let's remember that Rust has a
history of empowering developers along
many frontiers, making it easy to do
what was previously hard.
So first what Rust began to excel at CLI
tools and then it was high performance
web servers and databases. Then Rust was
reaching into satellites and space and
embedded microprocessors
[04:14]
and now Russ is even in the Linux kernel
uh which runs on billions of devices
every day and includes some of the most
hardcore systems programming there is.
These are all places where C and C++
have excelled. But if there's one thing
in this picture that Rust does not play
well with today, it's C++.
Rust and C++ simply share too many of
the same spaces to stay airgapped
forever. But R is still very much a
growing ecosystem with an evolving
language. If we could tackle all of
these challenges, we could certainly t
take on C++ interop. I'm feeling
optimistic. Are you, Taylor?
&gt;&gt; Uh, I'm feeling okay.
&gt;&gt; All right, I'll take it. Um let's cover
what we're going to talk about today. S
first we're going to talk about what
works which is the state of interop as
it exists today. Then we'll cover uh
where the gaps are uh the places where
it kind of falls apart. This will come
with a call for a better rust uh how how
[05:14]
can we can make rust better for interop
and for the benefit of all rust
stations. Let's dive in.
There are a number of tools in the C++
Rust interop space already today. Let's
take a look and understand what they do
well and what's still missing.
BindGen is the most widely used tool in
this space. Binden takes in C headers
and outputs Rust FI bindings allowing
Rust to call into existing C APIs.
Cbinden does the inverse allowing C code
to call into Rust APIs. Ben and Cbinden
both make use of source generation and
build integration. This is a common
theme we'll see in many of the tools
that we will talk about. These are both
examples of extension points that go
beyond what the language can do
natively.
However, both of these are low-level
tools which only allow working with Cabi
compatible functions. This means that
APIs must all consist of simple C style
[06:14]
strrus with public fields. If we want to
use types from the Rust or C++ standard
library, normal userdefined data types,
we're out of luck.
That means no classes, no Rust enums, no
RAI types like box, unique pointer, or
string, and definitely no userdefined
generic or templated types. Today, we
can't even pass around slices since
their representation isn't guaranteed.
In practice, this means that FFI code
requires a lot of manual unsafe and
errorprone work to convert in out of
Cbased representations as well as
separate declarations of RAI based
types. This brings us to CXX, a bindings
generator that offers solutions to many
of these problems.
CXX takes a different approach from
binden and cbinden. So rather than
reading from header files, the user
declares their shared C++ and REST APIs
in an FFI module which is annotated with
the CXXbridge macro. That module is then
used to generate the resulting REST API
[07:16]
and a C++ header
that allows users to declare these safer
higher level interfaces uh that make use
of standard types like slices, vector,
unique pointer and string.
There are some limitations though. uh
you have to manually rewrite your item
declarations inside of the FFI module.
That's because CXX can't see into the
definition of pre-existing types either
in Rust or in C++.
And since CXX doesn't know the memory
layout of of the existing types, they
can't be passed around by value. Uh so
they require an indirection through a
box or a unique pointer. To solve that
issue, let's have a look at Zengar.
Zengar is another newer tool in the
interop space. Similar to CXX, Zengar
relies on users manually declaring their
C++ and Rust APIs in a custom interface
definition language or IDL. Unlike CXX,
however, Zangar allows users to specify
the size and alignment of their types so
that they can be passed by value over
[08:17]
function boundaries without additional
heap allocation or indirection. However,
requiring APIs to be redeclared in a
separate ZNG file makes it hard to use
Zengar with large existing API surfaces.
Kubit is a new ongoing project at Google
with the goal of making every
non-mplated C++ function callable from
Rust and vice versa. Kubet takes
advantage of native compiler integration
with both clang and Rust C in order to
provide maximum coverage of existing
APIs.
However, this approach has some
limitations. Not all users of C++
interop can use clang and some of them
need to work with multiple tool chains.
In these cases, IDL based approaches
like the ones used by Zengar can be a
better fit.
So, within the realm of C++ interop, no
two projects want exactly the same
thing. Some projects want autogenerated
bindings for every API, while others
want to manually pick and choose which
[09:18]
APIs get bindings. One might depend on
unstable details of the tool chain for
better ergonomics or even safety while
another needs to work across many
different tool chains. One user might be
tied to a fixed C++ AI while another
uses an unstable AI and rebuilds
everything from source.
So can there ever really be one interop
solution to rule them all? I mean how
could it even begin to handle this
amount of variation?
One idea is through the use of IDLs or
interface description languages like the
ones we saw with CXX and Zungar. An
advantage that IDLs have is that the
author can control how much how many
details of an API to include. So for
example, Zungar allows users to choose
whether or not to specify the size and
alignment of a type. If that information
is there, you can pass around that type
by value.
If not, it's usable, but only behind a
pointer. In return, though, you don't
have to update your bindings every time
[10:18]
you uh change the types layout, and so
it'll be more robust, and it won't be
tied to a particular C++ or REST
compiler.
There may be a way that we can use IDLs
uh that also allow for um easy use of
these large existing APIs uh which is to
Today, Kubit takes in header files and
then directly produces Rust APIs. But in
the future, the plan is for Kubit to
produce a customizable IDL which can
then be transformed into Rust code. This
will allow users to take advantage of
the IDL to Rust translation regardless
of whether or not they use Krit's clang
integration.
These tools all represent excellent
steps forward and it is possible today
to create a mixed C++ R codebase
particularly if you have small API
boundaries that don't change frequently.
But all these tools suffer suffer from
[11:18]
similar problems because of C++ features
that just don't map onto Rust very well.
You see, C++ is this immensely powerful
and expressive language with a wide
range of usage patterns, many of which
are not easily expressed in Rust. It has
many built-in extension points to
support those patterns.
Some of those extension points I
consider mistakes in language design
that don't belong in Rust. Our goal
obviously should not be to turn Rust
into C++.
We can use strategies at the source
generation layer to recover some of the
usability of APIs that make use of these
features.
But let's also keep in mind that this
level of flexibility has largely been
responsible for C++'s success. Don't get
me wrong, it's far from a perfect
language, but the language has enabled
people to write very high performance
systems code that felt far more
expressive than anything they could
write before.
In this regard, there are some places
that Russ can continue to learn from
C++.
[12:21]
One area where we need to be especially
careful is unsafe. Dealing with unsafety
in C++ APIs is spicy.
Who can tell me whether this API is safe
for Rust to call? Anyone feel free to
shout it out. All right. Well, without
seeing the C++ implementation, this is
kind of impossible. You could call it
unsafe always, but we can't really tell
what the implementation is, right? Um,
while this example might seem silly,
it's common for C++ APIs to document
preconditions which have to be upheld in
order to avoid undefined behavior. The
obvious option then is to mark every C++
function as unsafe in RE. But this
creates a huge problem. When all your
code says unsafe, it stops meaning
anything. If we force developers to
write unsafe around every call to C++,
like the boy who cried wolf, the
compiler's warnings to exercise extreme
caution just lose their impact over
time. Code reviewers also can't tell
what changes they actually should be
[13:22]
paying attention to and which things are
like, you know, an extra special unsafe
transmute. This problem was so bad that
the fish developers actually forked
their own version of auto CXs just to
turn off unsafe entirely.
One option is support to support C++
side annotations to mark a function as
safe. This is a really great solution
actually. It allows C++ API authors to
carefully analyze once whether a
function is safe or unsafe to call.
Callers then know what contract the API
provides and don't have to litter every
separate call site with unsafe. Oh, this
is okay. However, this also requires
that the developers of the C++ API are
aware of and willing to include safety
annotations. This isn't always an
option, such as when you're working with
a, you know, third party C++ library or
a highly used C++ library whose
developers don't want to see their
function signatures covered in Rust
specific annotations.
[14:24]
Another option we can use is type based
heristics.
For APIs that don't provide annotations,
interrupt tools can guess at whether the
function signature is safe or unsafe.
This approach is currently used in
crewit along with annotations. For
example, if we see a function like the
one above, we can guess that it's
probably less interesting than a
function like this. This analysis is
obviously imperfect unfortunately
because as we saw before the first
function can have some precondition that
is required in order to uphold memory
safety. However, I'm advocating for a
harm reduction approach by making
functions like do something into safe
C++ usage sites. We can focus our review
efforts on mixed Rust C++ code bases on
more generate on more dangerous APIs
which deserve a spiky unsafe.
Raw pointers are the most obviously
unsafe construct. But what about C++
references? Can the function above be
[15:24]
safely callable from Rust? It looks kind
of safe at first glance, but there are
two big things differentiating this
function from the corresponding RS API.
Does anyone have guesses? Feel free to
Yeah, exactly. Exactly. So, one of the
issues is lifetimes. The RS API assumes
that the reference to the counter is
only alive for the duration of the
function call.
But the rest declaration also requires
that the pointer to the counter doesn't
alias with any other pointers. That is
for the duration of the increment
function. No other code can read to or
write from the counter. Let's talk about
the lifetime issue first since it's
actually the simpler one to handle. As
with unsafe, we can often kind of guess
based on the function signature and we
can provide a system for annotating
ambiguous cases.
For example, we can assume that the
mutable reference in our increment
function is only valid for the lifetime
of our function call. This inference can
be wrong in some cases. For example, the
[16:26]
constructor above stores a reference
which is still held after the function
call ends. However, this practice is
widely discouraged by C++ guidelines as
it can easily lead to hidden references
to expired temporary values. In the case
above, typew with ref's constructor
saves a reference to the stood string
argument. But that stood string which is
a temporary implicitly constructed at
the call site below will no longer be
valid when the call the dot value
happens. C++ the lovely language that it
is gives us the old as you wish and
causes use after free and nasal demons.
So to avoid this, APIs which store
references beyond the lifetime of the
function call conventionally take a
pointer argument rather than a
reference.
Similarly, we can infer based on
standard C++ conventions that methods
borrow the method receiver only for the
duration of the call except when the
view or a span. Reference aliasing on
[17:27]
the other hand, as several people
brought up, is a trickier problem.
Rust's mutable references are guaranteed
to be exclusive. They cannot alias with
any other pointer in the program. C++
doesn't have this requirement. Mutable
pointers can alias with other pointers.
This has real effects on Rust
optimizations.
In Rust, we can safely reorder the load
load and store to the counter value to
be before or after the call to the some
other thing function because we know
that some other thing can't read or
change the value of our counter. Our
reference to the counter is exclusive.
This optimization isn't valid on C++
code where some other thing could read
or write from the counter. This is a
huge issue for gradual C++ to Rust
migration. If C++ code uses multiple
aliasing references, porting the
implementation of a single function into
Rust without making any behavior changes
[18:27]
can introduce new undefined behavior.
This is terrible. Rust, you were
supposed to destroy the undefined
behavior, not join it.
We'll talk about how to avoid this
situation, but first let's talk through
an example of how it can happen in the
first place. Pure Ras prevents the
creation of mutably aliasing references.
So if we do have aliasing references,
they must originate from C++.
This can happen for example if a C++
field or a method exposes mutable
references to RS.
So for example, consider the CPP type
API which returns a non-const C++
reference from the gits method.
This looks like a mutable accessor
method. So we might expect to bind it
like you would normally bind one of
those write one of those in Rust. What
this Rust method signature says is that
if the caller can prove it has exclusive
access to an instance of CPP type, we
can give it exclusive access to the
[19:27]
value of S via a mutable reference.
But when we peel back the covers of it,
we we humans can actually see that S
refers to data outside the CPP type.
Again, C++ references are not exclusive.
So, we have no idea where that reference
came from or what other code is using
it.
That means on the rest side we've
written a check that we cannot cache.
Returning a mutable reference to rest
callers would be incorrect and like we
saw before it would allow optimizations
that change program behavior.
So the first question is what type
should get us return instead. We know we
can't use a rust mutable reference.
We also want it to be the same type that
gets used when we see a C++ reference in
argument position. That way rest callers
can take the value returned by get us
There are a few different options we can
use to replace reference types. Raw
pointers, shared references with
interior mutability or custom C++
reference types.
[20:27]
The simplest and most obviously sound
option is to use pointerbased APIs for
all references coming from C++. Using
pointer-based APIs would force all C++
reference or pointer using functions to
be unsafe. Notably, this includes all
methods since methods take a reference
to the method receiver, also known as
this. This isn't a satisfying solution
as folks would be forced to throw around
unsafe raw pointers and universal
function call syntax in order to get
their code compiling.
One other interesting option is to use
Rust's cell type. Cell is a transparent
wrapper which allows for mutation
through shared references. This prevents
undesirable aliasing based optimizations
we discussed earlier. However, Cell's
API relies on some invariants that
aren't upheld by C++ references.
For one, Cell assumes that mutation
can't invalidate other existing
references. Although it's okay to
project cell through structural or
[21:29]
product types like strrus and arrays, it
isn't okay to project a cell through
variant or sum types like option. The
reason for this is that changing the
outer option to none will invalidate our
reference to the inner type. You can see
this above. If projection allows us to
create a cell wrapped reference to the
i32 inside an option, that reference
will be invalid when the option is set
to none.
The same is true of container types like
vec or box. Modifying the container can
invalidate references to its inards.
Unfortunately, C++ provides reference
projection functions for all of these
types. This is the source of classic C++
problems like iterator invalidation, use
after free and more. As a result, C++
references mutating a type must be an
unsafe operation. It can invalidate in
existing references. There's one other
issue with using cell for a C++
[22:29]
reference threads. Because cell isn't
sync, cell assumes that the object can
only be accessed from one thread. But
when working with thread safe C++ APIs
such as a stood atomic of bool cells
APIs such as get or replace will read
from the object without performing the
necessary atomic load resulting in
undefined behavior. In order to properly
handle thread safe C++ types, all reads
and writes must go through the public
functions of their C++ API.
One exciting alternative is to add a C++
style reference type to R. This approach
avoids the instant undefined behavior
that arises from aliasing Rust
references. However, unlike regular Rust
references, the C++ reference types do
not require exclusivity in order to
mutate. As a result, we've lost Rust
guarantees that no concurrent mutation
will occur. As we saw with cell and
option, combining aliasing and mutation
can result in data races, iterator
[23:30]
invalidation, and more.
Therefore, it must be unsafe to mutate
through a C++ mutable reference where
that mutation can invalidate an existing
reference. The caller has to make this
guarantee so that we know that the
mutation isn't going to invalidate any
existing references.
The RS language today also has some
missing features that make custom
reference types like CPP refic.
So, one of these is field projection.
When using an aliasing reference to a
strruct, we'd like to turn it into an
aliasing reference to a field. Uh, with
references, this just works like in this
example. But today, custom reference
types require all this extra machinery
like the the approach that pin project
takes, which is based on derives.
We should add a generalized projection
feature that works for all reference
types, including custom ones. This would
also improve ergonomics for raw pointers
and for references to special types like
[24:34]
Another feature is auto referencing
which is a really nice ergonomics
feature of method calls in Rust. So when
resolving a method call, the compiler
will automatically insert shared or
mutable references to the self type when
it looks for methods for a matching
signature. This becomes so natural to
use that you probably don't even think
about it.
Sadly, it doesn't work for custom
reference types.
If we have, let's say, let's say we have
an own value of some type, we'd like to
be able to easily invoke methods which
take self as a C++ reference.
Um, sadly, this code doesn't compile
today. In order for our method call to
resolve, we need the compiler to apply
auto referencing rules for our C++
references.
Other library types like pin also want
this ability.
Field projection and auto ref or are
examples of generalizing what already
works in Rust to make it work for more
use cases. We can take the principled
[25:34]
mechanics that make Rust the language it
is today and apply it to adjacent spaces
which would expand Rust capacity to hold
both the principled and the practical at
the same time.
We've looked at three ways of handling
C++'s potentially aliasing references in
Rust. Raw pointers, interior mutability
with cell, and custom C++ reference
types. None of these approaches are
perfect, but with some help from the
Rust compiler, we can begin to offer
safer and more ergonomic APIs.
Let's talk about movability, another big
issue with C++.
Rust expects that all types can be
relocated with a simple mem copy. Common
libraries like ve of t rely on this
behavior and this assumption has been
heavily baked into unsafe code
throughout the rest ecosystem. Rather
than calling a move constructor, unsafe
Rust code has always been allowed to
simply bitwise copy values to a new
location.
C++ on the other hand makes the exact
[26:35]
opposite assumption. Nearly all types in
C++ require running code in order to
relocate them. These relocation
functions called move constructors
commonly perform some work to fix up the
moved value. Frequently this is due to
types that are self-referential where
one field contains a pointer to another
neighboring field. When the object is
moved, the pointer needs to be updated
to point to the new location.
For example, the libstead C++
implementation of string stores a
pointer to the string data. Usually this
data is heap allocated. But for small
strings, the string data gets stored
inside the string itself. Rather than
introducing a branch on whether the data
is inline or not, the string sets the
data pointer to point directly into the
inline string data. This means that like
other self-referential types, stood
string in C++ can't be relocated via a
simple R style memcopy.
Thankfully, there's growing support for
[27:36]
using Russ's pin type to represent
values that can't be memcopy relocated.
Immovable in place constructed and move
constructible values are super useful
even in native REST. However, there's
still a lot of work to be done before
working with these values is ergonomic.
All the issues we discussed before with
aliasing references around field
projection, rebarorrowing, auto
referencing, and method calls still
apply.
A final crucial item missing from the
interop story is calling overloaded
functions. Many C++ APIs make use of
overloading and users need access to
those APIs.
A second reason overloading is so
important to interop is because
maintainers of C++ APIs assume that they
can add function overloads without
breaking their existing users.
If having Rust customers means they
can't evolve their APIs in this way,
they simply won't want to have Rust
customers. And this is true for every
language with overloading, of which
[28:38]
there are many.
Rust has long avoided function
overloading for a couple of reasons.
For one, it can make it hard for
developers to determine which function
is actually called. Another reason is
that it weakens RS type inference.
&gt;&gt; But Tyler, we have overloading. It's
just like the version of overload
loading you'd get if you ordered
overloading on Wish.com.
&gt;&gt; What's that?
&gt;&gt; You, you know, like you ask Ferris for
overloading and he's like, "We've got
overloading at home." And but then you
get home and you see this mess. We can
emulate the same behaviors as
overloading with all the same problems
in Rust if we're willing to be creative.
Above you can see that the Rust compiler
is using the types of the arguments to
sumfunk in order to figure out which
function to call.
Also, we all do this today. Anytime you
call from on a type with multiple from
implementations, the compiler uses the
types of the arguments in order to
[29:38]
decide which function gets called. The
into trait is actually even more
powerful. It can use the expected return
type to determine which function to
call.
Adding an overload can break calls to
in. But this is also true for functions
with generic or impulate arguments.
Today, Rust should just support built-in
overloading, especially for interop with
existing languages. Overloading can be
much more readable and is no more
powerful or confusing than today's
trait-based analoges.
In addition to allowing us to consume
C++ overloaded functions, Rust
overloading is a perfect solution to our
earlier aliasing problem. Rust code,
which has an exclusive mutable
reference, is actually able to safely
invoke C++ mutation APIs. However, if we
have a potentially aliased reference,
the C++ API becomes unsafe. This
strategy also works for methods.
So, as always, we don't want people to
get carried away. Type inference makes
[30:39]
overloading less of a good idea in RS
APIs than in some other languages. And
of course, no one wants to use an API
with 17 different overloads for the same
method name. But I believe Russ can
avoid these issues for the same way it's
for the same reason it has gotten away
without overloading to date. It simply
has more tools in its toolkit like zero
overhead traits and generics and new
types that you can apply in situations
where you don't want to accept the
trade-offs of overloading but where you
might be forced to in another language.
What's really clear is that when it
comes to interop, you should be able to
call overloaded functions defined in
another language without jumping through
awkward hoops that aren't well supported
and that create a bad developer
experience.
Okay, let's all take a moment and
breathe together.
That was a lot. Creating Rust APIs on
top of a complex language like C++ is
really difficult.
[31:39]
We talked about applying unsafe in a way
that will allow us to focus on danger
points. We talked about lifetimes, about
mutable aliasing, non-memcopy movable
values, and overloading. Now, let's talk
about calling Rust. Calling Rust from
C++ is much more straightforward. Rust
is a simpler language in C++ and its
strong type system uh makes it easy to
understand the intended semantics of
types and functions.
In fact, my team at Google, the crew
team is doing this already today. We
automatically generate bindings to
hundreds of crates. We're able to
accomplish this by using the Rust
compiler to analyze a crates API,
looking for all public functions and
type definitions.
Calling into the Rust compiler itself
allows Kubit to determine the exact size
and alignment of every Rust type and its
fields as well as trait implementations
such as drop which we can translate into
[32:39]
a C++ destructor operator trait
implementations which we can translate
into an overload of the corresponding
C++ operator clone which becomes a C++
copy constructor and more. Do note that
Rust doesn't offer a stable API AI,
excuse me. So the autogenerated APIs
here need to be regenerated when the R
compiler is updated.
In the future, we'd love to see a tool
like this, possibly an upstreamed form
of this portion of kubit make its way
into the list of standard Rust
components like cargo, rust format, or
clippy.
One particularly interesting thing about
exposing Rust APIs to C++ is that it is
actually possible to support C++ usage
of generic Rust types. This is possible
even though Rust types can have
different in-memory representations
depending upon the generic parameters.
When we see a Rust definition of a
generic type such as option, we can
declare a corresponding template in C++.
[33:40]
We'll use static assert to mark this
initial declaration as unusable though
since we don't actually know the
concrete layout of our option. Then each
time we see a usage of option with a new
concrete type parameter, we can generate
a C++ template specialization with the
corresponding type substitution.
Note that this means C++ code can't
instantiate option with a type until
there is a generated rest binding which
provides a declaration with that
particular generic parameter.
For example, if C++ wants to use option
of some type, there must be bindings to
a Rust API which uses option of some
type. Until we see a Rust usage site, we
won't have generated a specialization of
option with that particular generic
parameter.
This can create friction. If you define
a new C++ type and want to store it in a
Rust option, you'll have to first
declare an intermediate Rust library
which uses option of new type somewhere
in its public API.
Once you've done that, you can create a
[34:42]
separate C++ target using the Rust
option of your new type. That wasn't so
bad, though.
By contrast, C++ templates are much
harder to bridge to Rust types. Rust
doesn't support specialization. So, we
can't apply the same trick. we just used
coming from from C++.
There are a few other tricks we can use
though today. We can generate unique
types in Rust for separate
instantiations of stood tupil for
example. That is for each unique
combination of parameters like ABC we
can generate a new rust tape like stood
Sometimes when passing types by value
over the language boundary, we can
convert them into a more language
idiomatic form. So here when returning a
tupil from C++ to Rust, the
automatically generated code unpacks a
C++ tupil and repacks the values into a
Rust tupil. Note that this only works
[35:43]
for types passed by value. C++ tupils
and rest tupils don't have the same in
in-memory layout and we can't change the
layout of types behind a reference or
inside of a field of an existing strct.
That means conversion based bridging
like this it can only be used in a
handful of places but it does make for
really nice really nice idiomatic APIs.
We can also make Rust generic APIs for
C++ templates whose representation
doesn't depend on the template
parameter. So for example, C++'s vector
and unique po pointer types have
representations that are the same no
matter the template parameter. In the
case of vector, it's three pointers.
Today, Kubit lets you manually write
types like this as bindings for
templated types.
These approaches work for a lot of
situations, but as a final cherry on top
of this presentation, let's take a
moment to peer way into the future.
Consider what it would take to go beyond
these strategies and deliver a truly
[36:43]
streamlined experience for generics. For
that, we'll need an approach that goes
beyond source generation. For that, we
need compiler integration.
Now, compiler integration is not that
scary. The basic idea is that you take
the insides of one compiler like Rustc
and the insides of a completely
different compiler like Clang and you
make them talk to each other.
&gt;&gt; That sounds kind of like the premise of
a horror movie actually. Look, you just
made Ferris turn into Cororo.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Okay. But the idea is not as scary
as it sounds. In fact, Swift uses
compiler integration with Clang to
automate bindings to Objective C and
C++.
And we can do this in a principled way
through the use of an extension point
that goes beyond the core language.
So let's imagine our stream template
looks like this.
One key idea is that when you substitute
parameters into a C++ template, that
actually works a lot like doing macro
expansion.
So what if we could have something like
a proc macro that got called every time
[37:45]
you used stream of T with a new T?
That proc macro or plugin could receive
type information for your input type. In
this case, the compiler would see stream
of my thing and so the input type would
be my thing. Full type and layout
information would be available to our
plug-in which can execute arbitrary
logic to define the layout and API for
stream of my thing. That could include
calling into a C++ compiler like clang
to get all the information it needs.
There is a lot of architectural work
that would need to happen in the rest
compiler and or in crewit to make this
possible. So we don't know if it'll
happen. If it does happen, it could make
using templated C++ APIs just as nice as
using non-mplated APIs.
All right, well, it's about time to wrap
up. We've covered a lot. As you can see,
the path to seamless C++ Rust interop is
complicated, but it's a journey we're
committed to. C++ remains the lingua
franca of systems programming. So
expanding the reach of Rust memory
safety guarantees requires that we have
[38:46]
a rockolid story for interacting with
large sol existing C++ code bases.
We can gracefully meet the needs of all
C++ users by providing tools that use a
combination of autogeneration and
interface definition languages.
&gt;&gt; I'm excited to see how good of an
experience we can create for people
migrating from C++ to R. One big part of
this experience will be new language
features. Features like auto ref, custom
field projection, and tooling supported
overloading will improve the experience
for all RS developers regardless of
whether or not they use C++. Thanks so
much for coming to our talk. Uh please
reach out to us if you're also working
on or interested in this problem space.
There's the conference discord or you
can come up to me directly or message or
email either of us. Thank you all so
much.
&gt;&gt; Thank you.

=== ROW 187 | f011413 | https://youtube.com/watch?v=11m5HRMvPmU | 2026-06-11 | talks ===
[00:07]
Our next speaker is Amos, better known
as faster than lime. Um, you might know
them from
There you go. Uh, you might know them
from from their their blog, uh, YouTube,
other online presence,
uh, and also the uh, self-directed
research podcast with James Monts, which
I personally really like. Um,
and they're going to be talking about
facet. Take it away.
&gt;&gt; Thank you.
&gt;&gt; [applause]
&gt;&gt; That was at the end of the applause.
Um,
it it's been over a year. It says a
year, but it's been over a year since
uh, I and the community on the Discord
and on the GitHub and on the internets
in general have started working on facet
and I'm I'm super thankful to the
organizers of Rust Week for letting me
come here and report to you, uh, you
know, how it started, how it's going.
This kind of thing. Um, but
in order to talk about reflection, we
have to start with derives. We love
derives in Rust. Uh, anything you want
to do with it, there's a derive for it.
If you want to deserialize some JSON
[01:08]
into a struct, Serde has got your back.
Uh, it has a derive macro called
deserialize, which implements the trait
of the same name. Really proud of that
transition. Um,
and this is a good thing, right? People
like that. Um, this is like people come
to Rust and they're like, "Oh, this is
neat. Uh, I really like that."
But but it's just one behavior. If you
want more behaviors,
um,
you might reach out for more derives.
For example, if you want to debug the
struct, might wrench for the the
built-in debug, which, you know, gives
you an an uninspired rendering of your
value, but it's it's useful.
Uh, if you want to implement the display
trait, you can go manual or you can go
doc comment. Can use the display doc
crate to do doc comment. Did you know
this crate? It's pretty it's pretty
neat.
So, we see a pattern, right? Every new
behavior calls for a new trait. Every
new trait calls for a convenience
derive. I'm aware that we have bare
functions. Don't
Do not. Please.
&gt;&gt; [snorts]
[laughter]
&gt;&gt; And derives are usually called uh, in
using procedural macros unless they're
built-in. And procedural macros have a
garnered some criticism over the years.
[02:09]
Which I will sum up succinctly as why is
a pure AST transform shaped as a rust
source we have to compile and optimize
and run and memorize getting
granting it full disk and network access
just in case.
Which is a fair question to ask. You
know, and and many people have tried to
to to solve that one way or the other
and then nothing has stuck so far.
And that's not all. Like despite solid
reusable bases like like sin and quote,
proc macros have to get a lot of things
right.
There's a high barrier to entry to
And even if you do make the best proc
macro on earth,
you still have to break network effects.
You still have to get adoption, right?
You have to somehow convince everyone
else to add support for your proc macros
in their crates. And when they say no,
inevitably, you have to add support for
their crates in your crate. So,
uh
rust orphan rules have created an
[03:09]
ecosystem composition problem, right?
You have to get all the crates to play
nice together, but um
it's it's like YouTube. You can't break
in anymore, right? It's it's you you
can't just do Minecraft on YouTube and
get success. It's It's the same thing
with crates. It's it's it's hard to
break in. Uh so, [snorts] as a
workaround, some crates have started
piggybacking on successful crates derive
macros. Uh for [snorts] example, this is
serde reflection,
which uses the deserialize crate to
implement reflection, which is the
software engineering equivalent of like
cutting up some some newspaper bits to
write a ransom note. It's
&gt;&gt; [sighs]
&gt;&gt; Uh I don't like it.
But most of all, I think the state of
affairs is a lesson in unintended
consequences. Because I don't think the
people who who approved proc macros and
they were like, "You know what? It's
it's a good start. It's a good stopgap."
I don't think that they realize
um, that they were laying the foundation
for the future anti-trust suite against
turdy, the proc macro that cornered the
entire market.
However, the idea of many crates
building upon a singular derive is, in
my opinion, sound. We just have to kind
of adjust our strategy. Instead of
[04:09]
trying to turn our types into more code,
since we're not able to predict all the
code we're going to need, all the
behaviors we're going to need, uh, we
might consider shipping data about our
types.
And that's exactly what fast it does. It
is a derive macro, so it is it is full
of sin like the others, um, but it only
adds an associated constant named shape.
So, what is the shape of a type?
It's a couple things.
Uh, you can barely notice it in your
Uh, you know, name, offset, alignment,
type name, type ID, decoration ID.
What's the difference? Type ID, you have
one for like a vec of U32 doesn't have
the same type ID as a vec of U8, for
example. Decoration ID, you have only
one.
Uh, how does it work? Don't ask. It's
the location in the source code plus
module path. What is it? Don't ask. I
said don't ask.
Uh, representation, [snorts]
discriminant, variance for enums, type
parameters, const parameters, which are
not the same thing, of course. Uh,
attributes, doc comments, you can read
the rest.
&gt;&gt; [snorts]
&gt;&gt; So, with all that information
about the shape of our types,
[05:09]
um, we can make a better debug, right?
One that has color, one that redact
sensitive information,
uh, one that dumps vecs of U8 as hex,
like as as bytes, which is very nice.
But, if you want to go further than
that, we must be able to call various
Which requires
Vtables.
V for virtual is just a struct with a
bunch of function pointers. And the
trick is it forces the compiler to
instantiate generic functions. For
example, we have vec push in very, very
dim gray down here. Uh, you have vecs of
different types. You might want to like
push a 32, an F 32, whatever. Um here
for facet, we're we're forcing it to
like generate all that code just in case
we need it.
And that ends up being a lot of code.
Is the problem.
Uh I was kind of hoping moving from
Serde, which tends to generate a lot of
generic code and and a lot of LLVM IR
and tends to be like show up if if you
[06:09]
try to profile your build, you're going
to see Serde is somewhere.
Um
and I was kind of hoping, okay, we're
going to trade some runtime performance.
Reflection is going to be slower, but
for for a better build times cuz it's
just data, right? It's not a lot of
code, you don't have to optimize it.
It's going to be better.
Uh I was wrong.
This is a negative result that I have to
report. This is what I'm here for. Uh
&gt;&gt; [snorts]
&gt;&gt; the build times are like
meh, like kind of it's a wash. It's kind
of same-ish.
Um sometimes better, sometimes worse.
Um we were right about one thing though.
Uh
performance is worse.
Runtime performance is worse. We were
right about that. This is like 100% uh
which is to be expected from a
reflection-based system cuz you're not
like walking through highly optimized
code anymore. You are now
uh walking through the structures. So,
it it by by design it is much slower and
that's a fact of life. You can do
nothing to change that.
Unless you're willing to do a lot more
crimes, of course.
&gt;&gt; [snorts]
&gt;&gt; Um I have
this RPC system. Well, I have like seven
[07:10]
RPC systems. So, who's counting? Um
which has like forward and backwards
compatibility. So, it's important like
you're you're connected to a peer and
you're not negotiating which version of
the protocol you you both talk, right?
They talk a version you've never heard
of before. So, you're just looking at
their structure and you're like, okay,
this field is optional, that field I
don't know but I can just ignore and
you're just kind of mapping, you're just
creating a translation table between
both.
You can take that information and shove
it into crane cranelift, which is a
just-in-time compiler. And if you do
that,
then you can actually beat Serde because
you have a lot more information that it
did.
Right?
So, I'm pretty proud of this I I was
just hoping for some applause, please.
Cuz come on come on, this is great.
Right? You show that slide, you really
feeling good about yourself. Uh but of
course microbenchmarks are always lies.
Especially the ones given at
conferences. Um especially the ones that
[laughter] you have you haven't given a
right of response to, right? Someone
else on the other end of that benchmark
should have a right to like spend 15
minutes and flip all those bars, right?
But they didn't. But too late, it's on
[08:11]
it's recorded it's live.
I won.
But they're all suspicious, right? By
default until proven innocent they're
all guilty. Especially that one. That
8.6x. You you're thinking you're like,
"How is Rust C/LVM losing against
CraneLift and Cloud, right?" It doesn't
make sense. It doesn't make sense.
Um and there's a very good question.
There's a very there's a very good
answer for that, sorry.
Uh it's a gap in Serde. Now,
Ah, can anybody yell what's wrong with
this? What's missing here?
When you're doing Serde, does it derive
serialize with here?
Like the Vec U8, you're doing post
Serde with, exactly. You're missing
Serde with. So, what's the problem? The
one on the left is actually dealt as
uh a sequence of numbers. And the one on
the right is dealt as an array of bytes,
which is very different. Uh for JSON,
not different. For
uh MessagePack, different different
kinds of records. For postcard, it's
just a performance issue, right? The the
one on the right is just a mem copy. The
one on the left is just a manual loop.
Uh the performance difference is
actually not that big.
So,
um
[09:12]
it would be nice if Serde was actually
able to like do that for us without the
annotation, right? But that would mean
[snorts] you would have to specialize on
the T in its implementation of serialize
for Vec T, which is not a thing in Rust
stable and should not be a thing in Rust
nightly either, cuz it's it's like has
many issues.
So, is that what I did? Is that Did I
just cheat? Like I I just forgot the
annotation, whoops. Cuz like we don't
need it in facet. Uh and this is why we
win. No, cuz uh what we're actually
serializing is this, vector of f32.
Uh which is a lot more fun because
even if you added with
you would have an adapter that then we'd
see, okay, it's a it's a vector of f32.
Now what?
We have a serializer. We have the same
problem. We're generic over the
serializer. Now we have to specialize
over the serializer. We have to see, oh,
we're serializing for postcard. Oh, then
we can take the shortcut, right? And uh
we have we can't do that, right? Cuz
there's no there's no array of f32 type
in the 29 30 types.
Whereas if [snorts] you're doing
[10:12]
reflection, everything is slow, but at
least you know the type at runtime. So
you just have a match and you go, okay,
it's u8, it's f32, it's whatever. You
can do your custom stuff, and it's all
good. And this is how, on this slide, if
you remember, this is how we can detect
that it's actually vector of u8, and
this is how we show a hex dump instead
of something else. And this is how we
won the race.
Now,
this is obviously not
closing the chapter on performance. I
can't just say, I made a jit, I won I
the graph is on my side, therefore
Because obviously shipping a jit is not
an option for everyone. But if you're
shipping for Apple platforms, Apple's
going to get really mad at you.
Uh if you're shipping a jit in general,
users are going to be mad at you cuz the
binary is going to be like, why do we
have an entire compiler backend in this
small command line utility? It doesn't
make sense.
Uh and the warm up times, you know,
everything in the safety.
But even like without the jit, just
reflection in general, there are
areas where a developer would be willing
to like trade some raw performance for
some better ergonomics. Like test
[11:13]
assertions. This is the default assert
act macro in Rust. You have to find the
difference. You have to play find the
difference. It's the port. It changed
from 443 to 281.
Me personally, I prefer pretty
assertions
that does kind of an enhanced textual
diff on the debug [snorts] output.
And it's much more obvious what's going
on.
But my favorite, of course, is my own
assertion library called VDiff, which
uses facet to actually do a a structural
diff. And you guys are going to tell me,
"Almost, that's basically the same thing
as the previous slide. You just You're
just bragging about nothing." Um
so is this one, right? Not a big
difference.
I picked the colors I like better.
Uh that one's much better, though,
right? Cuz the text diff gets very
confused.
But the structural diff is like, "Okay,
health is still there. It changed value.
Admin is gone. Metrics is added."
Pretty cool.
Uh and then of course you can do like
the same trick, byte diffs. Uh instead
of having one decimal per line, you have
an actual nice hex dump with ASCII and
everything.
Um
&gt;&gt; [snorts]
[12:13]
&gt;&gt; And then this has nothing to do with
reflection. I just wanted to
to show confusables. This is an actual
ASCII A in yellow on the left, and on
the right you have something that
renders exactly like an A, but is not
Uh another natural use case for facet is
fig, my crate, which is kind of a
fusion cuisine between clap and figment.
So it's it's doing a command line
parsing. You get this nice inline help
that you expect from any command line uh
application, of course. But you also get
an HTML version that just opens in your
browser. Uh and then you can search from
there. It shows you everything, the
defaults, the types. You can copy in
your clipboard like environment
variables you can set to override some
things. It's really nice.
And uh
just like figment, it it kind of keeps
it has layers, right? It's like config,
environment, and CLI args. And then it
keeps track of the provenance of
everything. So it knows, you know, what
you set from where. So you can When
you're debugging something in anger on
Kubernetes, this you would kill for
this. Just so you know.
&gt;&gt; [snorts]
&gt;&gt; And then you get nice error reporting
[13:14]
through I admin. It's just all very
nice.
Um oh, and you can export JSON schema,
of course, cuz you have information
about the types. So you can generate
JSON schema. Now you get validation, you
get auto completion, you get docs on
hover, you get default values,
everything.
Um
but
this not just like stock you just derive
the macro. You have to actually put some
arguments there to put some attributes
on your field and those were clearly not
part of like the default set of facet
arguments. They're clearly prefixed as
args. How does that work? Uh it works
like this.
Now you're going to you could just read
So it's not a second proc macro, right?
It's you're calling a regular
declarative macro
from your crate
and you're just declaring an enum and
you're like config doesn't take
anything, so okay. And then end prefix
can optionally take a string. That's it.
And then how's the error reporting? I I
hear you ask. Very good.
It's very good.
Uh this was really hard to make. Like it
[14:15]
looks easy, but if you look underneath,
you're going to see a bunch of back and
forth between macro expansions and you
don't want to you don't want to see
that.
Uh
there's so many other cool projects that
I wanted to to talk to you about that
are built on facet. This is facet egui
which lets you inspect and mutate
values, you know, at runtime with a nice
GUI as you as you would expect. Um I
don't have the time to tell you about
dibs, which is my semi-abandoned post
grass tool kit which lets you define
tables as rust types. We've seen that
before. Generates migrations so that
goes from one version of the code to the
next. We've also seen that before.
There's nice UI. First
&gt;&gt; [snorts]
&gt;&gt; Nobody did that.
Uh also you can like make queries,
right? You can
you can declare queries and you got auto
complete and everything. There's a nice
like editor extension works in Zed. And
um
and it generates [snorts]
the SQL for the query and it generates
rust to like bind the results back into
your rust types and you go but again
it's slow. Like who who wants to use
that? No, it's not. It's doing this as a
[15:16]
build script, right? Because you can do
reflection at build time. Why not?
&gt;&gt; [snorts]
&gt;&gt; This is compile time in like
we have compile time at home.
&gt;&gt; [laughter]
&gt;&gt; Um I don't have time to tell you that
this is not actually
um
a DSL. It's actually just a document
language that I made because nobody
accepted the pitch at the conference
[laughter]
uh to replace like YAML and TOML and
whatever, uh which is also built on top
of Facet for flexibility cuz it has
weird concepts that don't really exist
on JSON and other document formats. So,
yeah.
Um and I don't have time to tell you
about the language interop stuff that we
have. You can generate a bunch of
TypeScript types from your Rust types.
This is not novel. We have crates to do
that before. We had crates to do that
before Facet. The novel part is you
derive once and then you have all of
that stuff available to you once.
&gt;&gt; [snorts]
&gt;&gt; Uh
finally, Bevy Reflect. Many people have
asked me like, "What is the difference
between Facet and Bevy Reflect?" And the
answer is I don't know cuz I I haven't
looked at Bevy Reflect.
And so sorry. Uh someone [snorts]
should, honestly.
[16:17]
Um there's stuff going on
in the compiler and the standard
library. It's It's a nightly. Ollie is
working on it. Um
it has a different scope than Facet,
which is like both smaller and bigger.
It's different. It's still in progress,
but you you can go play with it right
now. It's a nightly.
Um
I don't have time to talk about all this
because I made a promise.
I want to say before coming here, but
no, I made a promise yesterday in my
hotel room uh that I would I would bring
the stupidest crate I've ever made
[laughter]
and present it to you
uh
&gt;&gt; [snorts]
&gt;&gt; as as as a Rust Week exclusive.
And if you think about it, Facet is
actually pretty bad, right? I'm not sure
I like it cuz it's a proc macro. We said
proc macros are iffy. There's a bunch of
problems with them. Uh it can't do
proper Rust enums. Why?
Uh cuz in every other language ABI means
application binary interface. In Rust it
means always be improvising.
&gt;&gt; [snorts]
&gt;&gt; Can't rely on you, you know.
It's a bit bloated. We said like compile
times are not great, binary sizes are
not great. I didn't show you numbers.
There's a reason, you know.
[17:18]
Weak adoption, you know, not even half a
mil downloads. That's that's weak. And
uh it's still not 1.0. You know, I've
tried. I'm like, who knows? Maybe it's
So, I've been thinking about
alternatives.
And what if I told you if there
What if I told you there's an
alternative that does not involve proc
macros or any kind of macros, right? It
supports all representations.
There's no vtables involved. It supports
all of the crates released or
unreleased.
And it's already 5.0.
&gt;&gt; [laughter]
&gt;&gt; I'm happy to present Bilbo JSON.
&gt;&gt; [laughter]
&gt;&gt; Bilbo is a crate that uses dwarf to do
reflection. It's not the first. I
discovered 3 years ago some folks from
Amazon also did that. They called it the
fact and there is read-only. So, mine is
much much worse.
Uh Bilbo JSON works
uh very well. It is the first the only I
think JSON deserializer in Rust which
does not have a generic entry point,
right? It doesn't need it. It just takes
[18:18]
an address.
Because what it does is it loads the
debug information. It unwinds the stack
one frame. It finds a local with the
same address as the pointer or like or
like the only thing of that type in the
frame. It's complicated cuz the NRVO and
everything. Um
Let me, please,
Whoops. [snorts] We are here.
Um
and
&gt;&gt; [snorts]
&gt;&gt; it finds its type and then it has its
layout and it does the serialization,
right? It's it's easy. You have all the
information. You have all the layout.
Why why do you need a derive macro? It's
already right there in the debug
information. Um now,
quick notes. Uh there's no error
handling. As you can see, it does not
return a result. I kind of forgot. So,
please don't pass it invalid JSON,
right? Just like C++, just be careful.
Just, you know,
&gt;&gt; [snorts]
&gt;&gt; um
This does rely on debug information. So,
please do not strip your binary. Please
be considerate. Uh
And you might be thinking this must be
crazy slow, right? You were like loading
debug information, parsing it. It's
[19:19]
famously like very complicated. If you
think that, you have not been paying
attention to my talk.
Because thanks to just-in-time
compilation, crane lift again, I'm so
sorry.
Bilbo JSON beats serde JSON on all three
&gt;&gt; [applause]
&gt;&gt; AND THIS IS MY LAST SLIDE, BUT I WILL
SAY
I TAUGHT you to be we already learned
something today. I taught you to be
suspicious of micro benchmarks, right?
All of these are probably lies.
The big one most of all, Canada is a
lie. Not the country, the benchmark.
And that's true. We're not doing the
same thing as serde JSON for Canada. We
are doing things differently, which
means it's it's not an apples-to-apples
comparison.
Serde JSON is actually taking a
shortcut, which means it's like one ULP
off for floating-point numbers, and
we're actually doing rounding correctly,
right? If we enabled the precise mode
for serde, it would actually be more
like 2.4x, but I thought that was, you
know, so [snorts] I just left it like
this. You know, never trust micro
benchmarks.
That's That's it. That's it for me. My
[20:21]
last slide. Thanks for attending.
&gt;&gt; [applause]
&gt;&gt; All right, thank you. I think we're a
little bit strapped for time, but we
should do just one one question, right?
We
the pressure.
&gt;&gt; [laughter]
&gt;&gt; Who's got a question? I see one hand
&gt;&gt; [laughter]
&gt;&gt; Uh so, there's a lot of stuff
here that you've presented about
reflection.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; How would you suggest that the Rust
project work on making all of this
complexity unnecessary.
&gt;&gt; That's an excellent question. Um
we don't need the next talk, right? I
can just answer for 20 minutes?
&gt;&gt; I think so, yeah, that's fine. We can go
until the end of the day.
&gt;&gt; Um that's a good question. I think um so
[21:21]
when Ali started working on the
reflection MVP, I was a surprised
because stuff has happened around the
Rust project and reflection I don't know
if everybody knows. And also just I was
like, "There's this consensus? Like you
get permission to work on this? Like
that's amazing." Um and also good luck.
Like Ali asked the same question like,
"Do you have any advice?" I was like,
"No, this is
It's it's a messy design space. There's
a lot of compromises." We went back and
forth and the the reason it's not 1.0 is
we can went back and forth on like what
to include, how to describe it, like do
you describe it from how the compiler
thinks about the types from like what's
useful as a user about the types? Do you
let it be like driven by serialization
deserialization needs? Or like it's
complicated, right? And and I didn't
talk about it but there was a lot of
concerns about soundness. Like if if you
are able to mutate things, you can
violate invariants that are just not
expressed anywhere except except for the
the code. Um
there there are more open questions than
there are answers right now. And uh I I
hear that the the reflection MVP is
actually being rewritten from scratch.
So I'm not the only one who can reach
1.0 right now. So

