=== ROW 284 | f015653 | https://youtube.com/watch?v=MLfTw7G2TZ8 | 2025-11-01 | youtube ===
[00:01]
Ladies and gentlemen, get ready to inspire by Lachesar Lechev.
Lachazar is passionate about space exploration and challenges it brings.
He is a community manager for Aerosol and works tirelessly
to promote rust programming in the aerospace field.
With love for open source and talent for bringing people together,
Lechazar is here to spark your curiosity about the future of aerospace.
Please join me in welcoming Lutchazar Lechev. The stage is
yours. Thank you very much for the introduction.
Hello everyone. Let me see the clicker.
Yes, clicker is working. Now. Today I'm going to
tell you how to get started with embedded rust. And this is the nonset
edition. This is only part one of the presentation.
I'm going to tell you a bit more about that later.
First I would like to take this opportunity to thank the organisers
of the UAE Rust conference.
[01:01]
I'm very happy that I can bring such support to
Ukraine and hopefully help people that are suffering the war.
And just massive congratulations to the people organising the
conference. I know how challenging it is. So good job everyone.
Now we have a small agenda for today. Small first
I'm going to tell you about who am I and why I'm
standing in front of you speaking about this.
Then I'm going to tell you a bit about the aerorest community and
some of the projects we are building. Then we're
going to take a look at the tools. This is the main part that we're
going to be drilling down and at the end I'm going to
give you a conclusion. At the very,
very end I have prepared a special demo which is
part two of this, but more on that later.
Now, I'm usually the person that you must come and speak
[02:02]
to if you want to build a spaceship. So I'm very excited about
Aerospace, as the introduction said,
and I usually love a challenge.
My name is Lozar Lechev and on most places you'll
find me as LPL. On x you'll find
me with an underscore and if you want
to reach out to me, dm me.
There's no problem, just reach out. I'm always happy to help.
Apart from being a developer and software engineer,
basically I'm also a community manager
of the aerorest community. I've decided to link just the URL
of the community website because there you'll
find also the discord invite, which is our
main place for gathering. We also have
a blog and newsletter that's hopefully coming
soon. We do want to share more technical
[03:03]
blog posts and also in the newsletter we want to include some of
the resources that our members are sharing in the community and
just condense it and present it to you so that you can ingest with
your pace without following the community. But as
always, it's better to just join the community and learn by
doing. It's a good place to mention
that we are welcoming everyone.
This was the attitude that I felt from the rust community
when I started writing rust. And I wanted
to keep this notion in the euro rust
community as well. So there are no questions, there are no
beginner. I'm beginner.
I don't know what I'm doing, because everyone is there to
learn and develop together. So definitely join in.
Now, the workshop started as an
IRA restaurant workshop at space conference Plovdiv in 2023.
[04:07]
We set out to build a very small workshop.
And on the right, as you can see here, there is a picture of
people assembling the frame. On the bottom right
you see the kit that you have to assemble,
basically with the breadboard and two microcontrollers.
And on the bottom left you see all the components needed
for the workshop. We're still working on it, but that's
why I'm here to tell you more about it. We do have
a few other projects currently in the community which active,
but we're going to be speaking about the nanosat workshop now.
See, clicker stopped working.
Come on.
So before we created the workshop, of course we had to set up
some goals, and there were three main goals that we had to
[05:07]
tackle. First of all, of course, the workshop has to be accessible,
so anybody should be able to source the
material, source the microcontrollers and be able to go through it.
The second is that it has to be beginner friendly.
So if you know a bit of rust or more rust
and you want to get into embedded, this should be
the workshop for you. And of course, it has to be a complete package or
a complete workshop. And that pretty much drove
the decisions on what application we should build.
Of course, on the left, you see that we had a few
crates that we wanted to use, embassy probe.
RS is for flushing and the hardware abstraction
layer and embossy. We're going to talk about it in a bit,
so we'll just skip that for now. And on the
right, you see that at the end, the workshop should
have cohesive exercises. Also,
[06:08]
it should have some kind of functionality. And above all,
it should be useful. So a complete application
that maybe it's done, but still does some
kind of functionality and you can take it from there, develop it further.
Now, the main thing that we're going to talk about is the onboard computer.
Well, that's how they call it a computer, but it really is a flight
controller, which means that it doesn't have operating system.
You want the low level stuff to be very near
the hardware. And in
the conclusion, we're going to be speaking about space applications and
why you don't want an operating system as small as possible.
Operating system. That's actually where our firmware resides,
onboard computer. Of course, you must
have some kind of a power system to
be able to charge the batteries and also a battery to power
[07:08]
everything together.
Now, of course, we are going to focus on the firmware,
and that's where we have gathered here today to speak
about and our firmware. We decided to
have a few components that we wanted to integrate,
the first one being a GNSS receiver. So GNSS
stands for global navigation satellite system.
There are a few constellations, for example, Galileo and GPS,
but there are others as well. We wanted to
have some kind of a radio. So the GNSS receiver, of course,
sends data in a given format, and we want to parse
that in order to be useful to us in the application.
Then we wanted to have some kind of a radio, so a way to send
the data or information remotely or wirelessly
to our kit and back. And for this we're
using currently Wi Fi, but we want to add other kind of
[08:09]
a radio, of course, to reach
further. And of course there should be an IMU.
IMU stands for inertial measurement unit. And this basically
gives you nine degrees of freedom, which means that you have accelerometer,
magnetometer and gyroscope. You can say
how you're orientated, how you're moving in space, and do
other stuff with that information.
Apart from that, we have a separate sensor, which is a pressure and
temperature sensor. And last but not least, in the exercises,
we wanted to include a way to
get the battery percentage, which there is a very simple
way to very few components that you can use to
do this. And we wanted to include it because
if you know the battery percentage and it's dropping, maybe you want to turn off
given peripheral or given task in order to conserve some battery
[09:12]
before the battery gets charged.
And when we're talking about nano satellite,
we actually want to build very expensive nanosatellites,
although in the last years the price has
gone down very much. But it's
still very, very challenging to first prepare a
nanosatellite, go through all the environment tests,
go over the legal stuff, and then still
pay for a launch and then go over the whole operation once
it's in orbit, if it works. Because most of the nano
satellites send a don't usually work, especially from
universities that are just launching their 1st, 2nd or
third nanosatellite, there's high chance that it won't
work. On the right, you see this,
the atmosphere levels, the atmosphere
layers. And it's interesting that Kalman
[10:13]
line is on 100 kilometres, which means that space
is where 100 kilometres officially starts.
But in order to get to orbit, you need to travel very fast sideways,
right? It's not just going up there and staying there.
And there is a very interesting part of the
atmosphere. Let me just zoom in for a bit.
And this is the stratosphere, this part here,
it's very low to where we live, right?
But most of the atmosphere there is just below you, so there's very
little atmosphere. The weather, you actually don't
have that much of a weather. You don't have thunderstorms,
you don't have clouds forming and so on. So it's very calm.
Even if there are winds and stuff like that, that can carry you away.
And this is where usually weather balloons travel.
They can go up to 50 kilometres.
Now I've marked a few interesting
things that you can notice, for example, that around
[11:15]
20 kilometres, it's like -55 degrees outside,
so it's very cold. And also
you do get a bit more radiation, of course, up there,
but most of the atmosphere is again below you. As you can see,
mouth Everest has only 28% of the atmosphere
pressure. And the more you go up,
the less it becomes.
Now, okay, we know that the stratosphere is
a good point if you don't want our thing to just float everywhere
rapidly or be brought down because of weather.
But the question is, how do we get there? Well, I actually
gave you a bit of information already about that. And this is using
helium balloons, of course, although it's not
inspired by the movie up, it's still a great concept.
And if you take a look at that idea online,
you'll find a lot of information, including that NASA
[12:15]
builds these giant super pressure balloons,
which are meant to stay in the
stratosphere for even months.
And they have very high payload
capacity because these are like huge balloons. They are special
kind of balloons. So they stop expanding at some
point. And on the right you see the more traditional approach,
which is using latex balloons,
they usually go to a certain point and of course because the latex expands,
they just burst at some point. And of course you retrieve it
with the parachute, your payload.
Okay, we know how to get there.
We have an idea what to build. Now the question is,
how do we actually start setting up our project?
The first thing that we're going to talk about is embassy.
Embassy. You can call it a framework.
[13:17]
I usually like to call it collection of traits, which allows
you to write asynchronous firmware.
And just a quick note on the right, this is
shortened and taken from the embassy repository.
So if you're interested to learn more about all these topics,
just cheque out the embassy repository.
The idea of putting them here as a list on the right
was to give you an idea how much stuff come into embassy.
And the first thing that you'll notice that there are quite
a few hardware obstruction layers that support embassy.
And there's STN 32, microcontroller support.
There's Nordic semiconductors, there's the Raspberry
PI, RP 2040, even espressif
systems as support for asynchronous and
embassy in their ESPRS parallel abstraction.
Now we have good support with mcus.
[14:19]
Okay, we know it's asynchronous for
writing asynchronous firmware. So it has to have asynchronous executor.
And of course, how you run stuff on the executor is with
tasks. There is a bit more
information about tasks and executor because of how
much space you have on a microcontroller. But it's
out of the scope for this tag. And there
are already production uses of embassy. I myself have used
embassy for a client's project related to aerospace.
And of course, as any project, as any software
solution, there are drawbacks. And I would say the
main drawback with Embassy, well, I can split them
into two, basically two options, two things through drawbacks.
One of the things is that if your driver
crate, let's say you have a sensor, there's a crate for it,
[15:21]
but the API that the crate has is only blocking.
Now all of the sudden you have asynchronous executor
tasks and everything, and now you have to handle blocking operation,
and you need to be very careful with that in your application.
The other one is, of course, you're dealing with async await.
So it might not be very intuitive for
beginners.
Okay, we have one of the main tools
that we're going to use, but now how do we actually set up the project
first? Yes, let's talk about the microcontroller and the architectural
support initially for the workshop that
you saw pictures from last year.
We began with the Espressif C three board, the rust board down
on the right, and the one that we are
currently using for the onboard computer is the Raspberry
PI Pico W, which includes a Wi Fi chip
[16:21]
which we use currently for the radio.
And you will notice between the two platforms that first
you have a different architecture. One is arm, the other one
is Risc five. Then the Raspberry PI
Pico has two cores and ESP 32
has single core. This is challenging
if you want to build the same application for two platforms.
How do you support that?
This is where feature gating comes into play.
I'm starting with the simplest example that
you can have two exclusive features in your project.
I've taken this example from the create for
the Wifi chip from embassy for the Raspberry PI
Pico W, and you can see here that if
both features, GFMP and log are enabled,
then this compiler error gets called and you
[17:21]
get the compiler error. So you cannot even compile your project if
you enable both features.
Now the other thing useful with feature gates,
feature gating, is that you can use aliases,
and not only for features you can use it for, or as you can see
here, typing less.
We can set out to,
for example, build or run a specific binary
enable given features, specify the target that we want
to run or build, or just build a
documentation for one of the projects which is very, very useful.
So the config tomo is your
friend. By the way, I forgot to mention
on the previous slide that nano satellite workshop.
You can find the link down below, but also there's
going to be QR code at the end if you want
to grab the slides as well.
[18:22]
Okay, you have aliases. What else do we have for
setting up our project? Of course, here you can see we already support
the Pico and the ESP 32, and we separate
them using NSS just to ease our life.
Well, other thing that you can do in your config tunnel is
set up default environment variables.
Specify a specific runner. In this case, for the RISC
five platform we use ESP flash to
flush our firmware on the device. And for the
Raspberry PI PQL we use probe,
probe rs. Of course you
can also add other stuff like rust flags. Or when you're building
you can add rust docs, doc flags and so on and so forth.
So really take advantage of that when you're setting up your project.
How do you set up peripherals then?
Of course, feature gating. We already discussed that.
[19:22]
But let's see how we actually do that in the code here.
I've taken example of the main structure and
application structure, which is for the Raspberry PI PQL.
And as you can see here, we can enable Dyesburg C
peripheral for field in the struct with
more than one feature. In this case we only need when it's
running, when the IMU is running. So that's why
we only add one feature. And this will basically remove
the field if we haven't enabled this, this field,
this feature, sorry, now we
have the peripheral. How do we initialise it? Well, the same way
when you're implementing the application and you have some kind of a
constructor. In this case it's a init function.
Again, use config feature to enable this
peripheral. Spawning a task
the same way you have the spawner, you have the executor.
[20:22]
The executor can give you a spawner and you spawn this task only
when the run IMU feature is enabled.
And last but not least, you have the
task itself. You already can see this embassy executor task
macro attribute here. And of course you can
add documentation in our case for the workshop.
Apart from this information that you have for how to calibrate the sensor,
we would like to add more information on how to actually set up or
go over the exercises. So we're going to have different
exercises and more information about how
to make the exercise. We'll go here.
Okay, now in conclusion,
target dependencies versus feature gating I've
seen mostly in the community that feature gating is used.
Maybe you can do specific things with
[21:22]
target dependencies. Maybe it will get messy.
You have to try this for your own project, see if that setup
works well. But feature gating,
even in embassy it's very pronounced and
it's more flexible in the way that as you
saw in the beginning, you can have two exclusive features so
only one can be enabled, but both are supported
for your architecture. Your feature then.
Real time Linux versus Embassy well,
I told you that I'm going to talk more about
operating system versus running something on bare metal. On bare
metal you still can have operating systems, but Linux
is generally considered a very large operating system.
And even though it's real time, there's only preemptive tasks,
which means that you have to deal with the whole complexity
of the whole Linux kernel rather than just your
[22:23]
specific application. And there's very interesting
things when you get to space. There are high
energy particles which can turn your one into zero or
your zero into one. Heat your storage do
some damage, right? And the larger the
dial, the CPU, or the memory size
or the code size, even the more likely is this
to happen and some catastrophic failure to happen.
Of course the low level system are built robust
in a way that they're redundant. You can do the same
thing with Linux. There are companies
in the space industry that for example run
up to three redundant systems
or three redundant kernels doing the same thing. And then they start
comparing to see if one of them is wrong, for example,
to take the right value. Okay,
[23:24]
so embassy is ready for you. Linux,
there's still place for it, right? But now onto
the last point, and this is a special demo
because honestly I'm very very lazy
and I don't want to carry this hardware all the time.
So this is the kit that we're developing and you have
to carry all the things all
the time with you if you want to debug or just do things.
So why not just work on remote flashing?
The more complex demos and
examples will be at expressive Devconf 2024, which is
in September. So definitely make sure to come along and
see the second part of this talk. But now let
me show you the quick example for
today. Now first, what we're going
to see in this case we have the
[24:24]
laptop. It's going to run both a server and
a client, just to make things simpler.
But the server can as easily go on a raspberry
PI be CI or continuous integration
somewhere with connected hardware to it and
doing some kind of work on the hardware.
But for now we're just dealing with this laptop.
First of all, I have prepared here the server,
I'm just going to run it. There's some configuration file that does
a bit of how they are authorised and so on and
so forth, what kind of debug probes you have connected
or can connect to, and so on.
And on the other side we have the client.
For this example I'm using the embassy ADC
example, which is a peripheral, and this is the one that you can
use for reading out the battery percentage.
[25:25]
But let's try to flush it remotely and see what happens.
So now here nothing happens, I'm still working on it.
But on the other terminal you will start seeing
these logs that are coming from the embedded
system and you can see that we have 38
degrees. This is an onboard temperature sensor on the RP
24. Here it's
giving out error just because this
tool is specifically made for running CI. So there is
a limit of how long your task should run. And this task just runs forever,
so that's why it's giving an error. But you can see on
the client side, we eventually got all the logs from
this job, so that's good. We still have some output
from the server and yeah, we just run remotely
flushed our hardware and
with this simple demo, I think I'm
[26:28]
finished. Thank you for your attention. You can find the slides in this
link or you can scan the QR code.
Thank you very much.
So Lachira, thank you so much for your presentation. It was very interesting
and very like,
how does he. It provided a lot of interesting new
information. We actually have a lot of questions
in Q and A. I'll try to prioritise
them appropriately. You're going to read them out,
right? Yeah. Uh, so how does
embassy framework facilitate asynchronous development in
embedded projects? Projects,
uh, how it allows it or. Yeah,
uh, yeah, basically when, whenever you're
waiting for something to happen, let's say an interrupt
to get triggered, or some information to come on
[27:30]
the USB, for example, the executor actually changes tasks
and goes to something else. So that's the
power of asynchronous programming. That's why having a blocking
driver is actually a very big deal,
because you have this asynchronous executor which can do a lot of stuff.
A lot of tasks can run on a single core
and be switched by the executor. But the moment you
have something blocking and takes more time than usual, then everything after
that starts failing. Right. You expect, for example,
the sensor to be caught every 5 seconds, it starts getting, or every
2 seconds or five milliseconds or whatever, and at some point it starts
getting cold less often and less often.
So this is a challenge.
All right, so, but the embassy
framework itself does not have asynchronous primitives.
Primitives? What do you mean as a primitive?
[28:33]
Like something which returns a future or an executor.
Yeah, there is the executor. And basically you can have asynchronous
functions as tasks. There are
some limitations, you have to cheque them out. And how embassy
works underneath, it's a different topic
that I don't want to get into right now. Okay, that's fine.
Are there any challenges in supporting multiple boards
in a single project, and how can we overcome
those challenges? Yes,
so we started with the espressif board,
and later I decided to add support for the Raspberry
PI Pico, which is a challenge and still is
a challenge because you have to set up all the features
correctly and in a way that allows
it to be flexible. So this probably was the biggest challenge and still
is the biggest challenge, just dealing with all the features.
[29:34]
For example, the embassy executor for the PiCo needs one feature,
for the espressif board needs another feature.
What I personally did for this project was to have the onboard
computer application and then two separate crates which
have their own application struct which gets called at the
onboard computer one why I decided
to do it this way? Well, just adding support
for both platforms at the same cargo Toml file
will be a challenge and you have a lot of dependencies.
So I decided just to split the dependencies in their own crates for the
different applications, the two different applications,
but be caught in the top application down
board computer. That's how at least I've set up
the multi board support,
right, understood. Thank you. So the next question the
person asked Botan asks, I know that Pico has
[30:37]
PIO. I assume it means programmable IO. Does ESP
have something similar? If yes, is there an abstraction layer
for it? So expressive
is taking on the challenge to support their community,
the rust community. So they're doing all the work for the hardware
abstraction layers and they generally have
very good support even on the non std version.
Shout out to Omar, who probably finished his
talk already, but he was the one that came to to Bulgaria
to perform the workshop with with me on the space
conference, I think.
Yeah, I lost my Pio.
Yeah, I'm not sure about the espressif, sorry, I forgot my
my sentence, but I'm not sure about espressif.
But it's very easy to cheque. I personally haven't used Pio,
[31:37]
but it's used for many things, including outside
the rust community. I've seen very interesting applications for the
Raspberry PI Pico, so definitely cheque out some
articles. Thank you. So speaking of workshop,
is the repository enough to complete the nanosat workshop?
Do you think it's a good first embedded project for someone who is
already someone who already has rust skills?
The goal is to be, as of today,
we're still working on the actual implementation
once the application is done and
we have a set MVP version for the hardware
because we want to support our community with this hardware.
So we're going to start selling an MVP product soon.
Hopefully by the end of the year we will have pre order.
So definitely watch out the community and subscribe
to the newsletter. But generally
[32:40]
the current version of the workshop is not ready.
There have been many problems even with the old version and
with the new version. All the code is there. So we need to
remove it and write the exercises to tell you. Okay,
now set up this peripheral. Now do this. And do
it in exercises split by sensors,
by different features that you can add and so on.
Thank you. And do you have, like.
I know it's a bit of a hard task. Do you have an estimate?
When do you expect this to be in a good
state? Definitely for the pre
order, I think we should have something or by the end of the
year. Currently, we are focusing on
the hardware just because the application itself also has some issues.
So we are debugging testing. We want to fly this kit as
[33:42]
well. So put it on a helium balloon,
start testing, because there are many challenges that you need to
overcome in order to make it useful. For that
kit to be useful, it needs to be doing something useful.
You need to be able to put it on a balloon, send it for
it to survive. Otherwise it doesn't make sense.
But the idea of doing like some kind of a crowd crowdfunding
campaign with preorders and also, you know, support in that way,
the aerost community and the efforts in the workshop are
the way that we are looking to do everything.
Workshops. Can you name maybe a simple workshop for embedded
devices?
Well, there are a few rust embedded
books online. I know Omar wrote
a book about embedded, but workshop like
[34:42]
this one, that takes a bit more general approach.
Many peripherals, many exercises. I personally
don't know about any, but there might be.
And just have a look. Understood. Thank you.
Speaking of hardware, does the nanosat include some manoeuvring
system or will it orbit until it burns in
the atmosphere? The easiest one
is to add magnet torques, which are
just coils,
winded wires that you can use
to apply voltage.
Make basically a magnet and orientate
the satellite based on the magnetic
field of the earth. Currently, our one
is very simple. It's made to be accessible. We are
trying to make it as simple as possible and as easy as possible.
But for different applications of these kits,
not even in space, but as you saw, the stratosphere,
[35:44]
we have a few applications and we. We are starting
to look at propulsion as well. So a way to control
where the balloon goes, which can be very
useful if you have specific payload and you
want to put it in a specific place. So it opens up your
challenges, but it solves a lot of things. You don't need Starlink,
right? If you put the right antenna and power on
this thing, it will undercut Starlink. For example,
why orbit? Right?
Right. You're absolutely correct.
So does your system use
bare metal RT OS or some embedded OS?
So embassy is the framework
that you're using to build your firmware. So you don't have any
operating system, no real time operating system. And embassy
does support preemptive tasks. So you can have one executor with
[36:46]
low priority tasks and one executor with high priority tasks.
But I personally haven't used that. So definitely cheque out the
embassy examples. So, do you know
which microcontrollers are popular in
nanosets?
From my limited knowledge, I know that some
of the startup companies are using STM 32 as
a microcontroller for their systems.
For the rest of the. Yeah, the rest
of the industry, it really depends. Some are using common off
the shelf components, universities and so on. Some decide
to use radiation hardened or radiation
resistant chips, which are generally with
less power or less
capabilities, bigger, but are very,
very reliable in these tasks. So it really depends
[37:48]
which route you decide to go. I haven't dealt
with radiation hardened or radiation resistant
chips, but you can find information online.
All right, and the last question, what strategies can
be employed to integrate rust with legacy embedded system
that uses non standard or proprietary hardware interfaces?
What references rust have?
So, for blog posts or
other resources that you can cheque,
currently I cannot tell you if
they exist, but there are a few people in
the community that have worked with, let's say, a c
library that provides support for a given chip.
One of the people in the community decided to make a driver
crate for a small radar
[38:52]
that you can use. And I
don't think they wrote any kind of workflow
or how to do it, but I know it's possible. So you can integrate,
probably you can integrate rust in old embedded
projects if you steer away of any kind of peripherals
and so on. But do some of the logic in rust and just
cross the boundary.
Or you can integrate C into rust, as we all know.
So I personally
didn't ever learn C. I tried a few times.
I felt miserably. It had to be rust. You know, when you try to learn
c for a few times and you fail and
then rust comes along and then, oh, all of a sudden,
yes.
That actually concludes all the questions.
[39:55]
So I would ask one more question, which is,
what kind of result would you expect from a successful Microsoft launch?
Well, to work, the first thing is to
work and not launch it, and then just figure out
that something went wrong. Because even NASA fucks up,
right? Even the big people are fucking up,
like big time sometimes, but that's why there are processes.
There are so much things I
can generalise as things that you must know in
order to launch a satellite. And we're not only talking about the technical
part. Right. You have all kinds of standards, all kinds
of institutions, law and so on, to. To take upon
before you actually launch it. So it's a very, very capital intensive
and time
consuming effort. So if you launch something
[40:56]
and it works, that's the first thing you have to cheering
for. Hopefully we can get to space. I know
it's a very challenging path forward, but that's why
we took a different approach, just building
something that can still be useful here on Earth, to people here
on Earth, without launching into space. But it
is a path forward to actually get our community to launch a satellite
at the end. Thank you so much.
Yeah, this is an excellent presentation and I hope
everybody here enjoyed it as much as I did listening to you
and. But that concludes the presentation
and we can go. Yeah. Thank you
very much. Enjoy the rest of the conference.

