=== ROW 275 | f015634 | https://youtube.com/watch?v=j2jWtZRfEec | 2023-11-06 | youtube ===
[00:00]
Oleksandr Mykhaylenko, who is a developer and architect of creative work from the Faculty of Informatics of the Kyiv-Mohyla Academy, Oleksandr the Great, a technology lover
and came from a rock to a rast as I love programming Oleksandra will give a presentation on the topic of the evolution of blockchains written At the same time, this presentation will emphasize the times in the world of blockchains will provide examples of existing
systems of bocce will be written by Apparat and will investigate the influence of conditions on the future of the decentralized world Oleksandr writes: my playing is not the best Spoiler this time he does not like strong coffee and heavy music Please
welcome Oleksandr to the stage.
Thank you very much. We Yes, good. Introduced again I congratulate everyone.
Today, I will talk about fleas in language.
In addition to the review, there will be 1 more interesting presentation, which we will now talk about and I think we can start. The topic is evolution, blockchains written in the language.
[01:08]
on the way we have already come in the world, blockchains, we evaluate the stimulus around the technology because it is important, we will see what you can offer your track without blockchains, today, and also Let's assume where the technology
can develop, and the main thing is why we are here. Yes.
A few words about me This year I am graduating from the bachelor's degree at the Faculty of Informatics of the Kyiv-Mohyla Academy, I am interested in block cryptography, Ihor has already said that let's start, that's enough
a popular language for writing blockchains, blockchain in general usually has 2 such large parts, this is the block, this is the blockchain itself, and it is the user, the user part, the block chooses once.
Often due to rapid growth, often due to an active Opensor community, because decentralized technologies are by their very nature, open, and also because of resistance to errors, because this is perhaps the most important thing in blockchain
[02:09]
on the other hand, for users of the programs, they choose it because of its easy compilation into a web mblk, for some blockchains because of the presence of news sites that, in general, make it easy to compile Rasta to Basembi, yes
also due to the presence of macros. For custom programs and using procedural macros.
We can write entire programming conditions.
In order to make it simple, convenient and safe for people to write their user programs, smart contracts or programs or whatever you want to call them, quite a lot of repositories in the blockchain category are being collected
stars on the back and I decided What this indicator is It is important to include because this technological category is very alive and very widespread it is worth remembering this, however, before starting the consideration of the seven
blockchains I want to talk about the time around this technology. In general, many people, especially developers, are absolutely sick of the word blocks, because they associate it with cameras, for
[03:16]
neftii spared like Terlun also with mixers of the type with mixers of the Tornado Ker type with blockchains in a manner that is, with criminal activity as well as with financial
pyramids I think 1 of this sphere.
Maybe more people remember Bitkonect.
I have heard, but in general, in my personal opinion, this is, first of all, it comes from two such sources, one source is that the technology is difficult to understand, and on the other hand, the fact that people, in fact, because of this complexity, have a rather low level of literacy in this
topics because of which I am so much from the cameras and in general it is very like that.
Not a user of Frendispe about the bugs.
Not a scan as not some magical technology, to overcome by overcoming there Not corruption or mistrust or yes or other problems it can be generally applied to centralized systems so that their
[04:28]
improve so let's go further blocky now today we're moving we're going to move along this tieline starting in 2009 and ending in 2023 at the current moment we'll start
in We with Bitcoin and Bitcoin, was the first blockchain, that is, a decentralized database with a concession and shared code execution, it was launched on January 3, 2009, its idea was to create
money, and able to exist in non-banking systems and countries. He used public key cryptography to identify users, the uti-kso model for public enterprises
and for bitcoins, for themselves and also there was a pseudo-anonymous blockchain is not a pseudonymous blockchain, because Bitcoin does not store special information about users, except for the public key
but there are moments of dictionaries and sessions. I will tell you about bitcoin, in turn, it was written in the language of all plus plus and there were quite simple reasons for this.
2 main reasons: it's fast. Action or plus because it is obvious that it is fast, the language, and also a bunch of implemented cryptographic libraries, in the language of sit it was the year 2009 there everything was very good in this respect at that
[05:45]
time. We are moving immediately Further along the tieline, we jump ahead to blockchains and branches and ethereum for 6 years.
First, a little bit about ether. In general, ether became a new step in the development of blockchain technologies and it completely shifted the paradigm in the understanding of blockchain in terms of programming, because previously
the term blockchain developer, if there was such a thing at all, it meant a person who writes new blockchains, then ether absolutely pushed this concept, and lithospheric, slab, in the development of the block scientists are more correct, development on
Blockchains have become precisely the flavor of contracts, that is, user programs, in turn, as Ether did, he added the ability to execute user code in the form of smart contracts, that is, such blockchain
[06:45]
programs, and on the other hand, with the emergence of smart contracts, he created a new class of applications, which is called decent warm solutions or di-eps ether, which was implemented in the language Such
decision. It was done by those who implemented it, but about memory.
Ether We will now talk and compare for the third time in 2015, once appears in the block innovation then did not stop and the developers saw the potential in the expansion of technical
the possibilities of already existing crimes, and such as Ether, one of such people was Hevinggood, the founder of the Pereti company, he saw that Ether could be better in this way, a Project called
Open-filiom, or before the champion as it used to be called, this is the first time without blocks, a project that made logical changes compared to client C, that is, Gu and lions, it provided a higher effect quickly
[07:49]
as well as some logical changes that allowed this blockchain essentially like Ether to work in consensus mode On the other hand, before Ether compared to Bitcoin.
2009. He already used the ras version of the cryptographic libraries from the tent, the entire project of trascript and other a perti etheri was much faster than I spent here
graph There are 2 lines. This is the speed of the processing speed of the blocks and the longer the line, the better you can see how much faster it is.
The Client works before the broadcast. The Red Line compared to Gu and the movie is the Blue Line Let's move On sneaking forward.
For 2 years, and switch to block subsidies personal This is a framework for the development of blockchains that allows you to assemble the necessary parts to build any block This is the queue
[08:49]
of transactions Arpiy Module Pirrconekshu Module with the help of lipita or something else, it is a consensus and also a code execution environment and others. It was the product of a really long development process
ethereum because the same company did perty and this Femburg instead of being just a new client for ethereum it evolved the very powerful and popular Femburg to develop a new
the blockchain abstract appeared in 2017 in November to be precise the first, the implementation of the shelf here came out in 2018 about the shelf.
I will later, perhaps, tell in more detail to those who are interested. But in short, this is a wandering with hydrogen charting written on an abstract substrate, introducing such an interesting innovation, which is called a forkles, it is an opportunity to update the executable
the code is locked without restarting it, well, it's cool, because usually when some software is updated, on the plane you need a hartform to update it, if it's nonsense, if it's nonsense, then it's called
[10:04]
dryer sheets Nothing like that happens, but Personal is almost not needed Nutrition moments when they are needed but the formula.
Through the use of smart website usage and the runtime environment, it has allowed to reduce at least very much the number of hat forks that are needed during the lifetime of the network. But why did we start in the first place?
it is very easy to talk about Web-sables and prophecy.
In addition, what we need to do essentially, 2 steps to have in the file is the first is to write the program in new studio and the second is to add a compilation plan and compile with vase which
produces compilations. He grows fast.
It is light. In general, these 2 languages. Very good, and the binary format works very well together, let's move on. Next, along our tieline and the next two planes that we will consider, it will be a pit and a salty measure.
[11:24]
implements homogeneous sharding, i.e. it is divided into identical smaller copies of the blockchain and synchronous execution of functions flavor of contracts is one of the big chips of the pit team measures very carefully
approached the development of this blockchain and specifically to such a concept as the trilemma of scalability.
Where we have conditional text, its vertices are execution speed, security and decentralization, and we can always choose only one side of this triangle.
decentralized But besides that, it's worth talking.
About unparalleled development experience.
Na nir has excellent documentation once to a specific feature allows us to generate nice documentation Klicha was very clear also obviously control the Project through a complaint also Apart from these Apart from
[12:26]
The world takes a lot of development experience from open source computers and uses a lot of crates as in principle other projects but once. Thus, it gives us this opportunity to innovate
for people to work together on technology and create such cool products as new york flavor contract for the hole they are developed in Pure language, since then Obviously, by pure I mean with macros they are
in simple and understandable terms, and what is important is not an overloaded max, let's move on, on our planes and the next blockchain is very popular, many people know it, it is salty, it is salty, it is a blockchain. It is written in the language
launched the beta version of the mainnet in March 2020, the development has already started.
[13:31]
already Today we considered its main difference is the mechanism of trusthisters that allows this plane to perform an extremely large number of transactions per second, compared to other blockchains, thanks to their
chronological ordering of the truffle in history This is a powerful algorithm, but it requires a lot of speed to perform, namely a lot of hash operations, a lot and with speed, as we can already guess, it can always
help, rast, yes. It is worth noting that the Solan validators require quite powerful validators compared to other trade union systems. This is an analogue of the taste of contracts for Solon. They are called solono
try as well as contracts nir and smoke substrite they use rast Let's move on.
Secretly a year. We Are Today 2023 will consider other blockchains that are worth talking about, the first blockchain, in my opinion, is one of the most popular blockchains, the most interesting recently is Aktus, it is very fast and also
[14:46]
uses the Mu language for its smart contracts.
Which is actually very similar to once and it is essentially, a simplified time, also this one which introduces a new object model, blockchain also speed of execution and also uses a language like
or not the developer, zikesh also uses ras This is such persons. Blockchain, which has existed for a long time and focuses on privacy, transactions that cannot be untraceable, who sent money to whom, as well as mom or
Bina Property. This is Blochei, which implements the taste of contracts with Zironovy strufami. If anyone is interested, then I will tell you later, but here we are talking about privacy, performance, and once, in this regard, it works very well with Zironovych profmy, there are many
[15:46]
examples that are already working also other blockchains, this space I talked about it earlier.
I didn't say because I knew about him first of all as a block of dummies Despite the fact that the tender is written in Rasti and also an Internet computer, let's talk about the future, about what will happen next, what are the prospects, the growth in the world
blocked place in general. For innovation. There is still a lot left, a good direction of development is the decentralization of already existing systems, which will prove that blockchain is not some kind of financial pyramid.
Schematic scan or something. In fact, a tool for reducing trust and for increasing user security, not ironically with cameras and with other, but my specific example, it is based on an initiative with
decentralization of the document system in the European Union is called Vin i biye-site jurpin Block or information This is an infrastructure that allows decentralization and to some extent, not
[16:57]
completely and transform the procedure for verifying the identity of a citizen. If you look at our Ukrainian action, I will say a remark to many: many may have different opinions about the action, and now we will not speak
specifically about all the problems of action, obviously, which blocking solves But, in one aspect.
It can improve the action First of all, because our action.
Ukrainian is a centralized application and despite the fact that it has numerous advantages for users.
Centralization. Its actions are threatened both with the potential loss of data from the server, as we have seen, on January 14, 2022, and with a complete stoppage of work in the event of a cyber attack.
Action service According to the model, universal education will become safer for users and more resistant to cyberattacks. Here, in turn, it can play a key role, because language programs usually provide us with quick
[18:04]
action, and such a fast action that can be satisfied by states or large enterprises. On the other hand, since it has an advantage in memory security and error resistance over si or Plus or languages ​​of a similar level, I also do not
I am tired of saying that there is a very active community, people have their crypts and there are a lot of them, as we can see from the following list, these crypts for tent cryptography will reveal the entire project bilec 12,300
81 This is the ethical Kryva Pnk.
This is a system for generating zronovych profile of plates 2, this is a hash oppenzi kipii, it is also a system for generating zronoch-profile, as well as turing, which applies indirectly
block chain This is Vasom Time, this is the execution environment, it is also worth mentioning Vasmer, I heard about it from past presentations of Vasom-Penjinsite on degeneration.
[19:09]
With the same code, this is also the Rock Day of Kyiv.
These are databases. Kutivelyu a sinkasti ditoki otse Vrantaymo Synchrony Hyper Expert Jisson Narpisi I think it is clear Borshch Serde and other critics of serialization in general
summaries once showed himself to be a serious player in the world of blocks.
very much and ironically, ra and blockchain is a great way to start working with growth in production, that is, to write and earn money, I invite everyone to visit the pages, blockchains, which we talked about today, which you have
what are you, the most? We are interested and Let's develop a decentralized world that speaks the language, once everyone Thank you very much for your attention.
[20:14]
If you can see what my grandfather Hub can do on the screen, he would be very happy to go to the Q&amp;amp;A session.
So. Thank you. Oleksandr For your presentation.
It was very wonderful. E: Yes, Ee Trend: Tesove.
The first thing we have is you have a live question, Do you want to provide the right questions. Ours?
Let's go to Kionei first. And then the question. Ours.
So? There is then then Yes. Then there is such a question. What is a decentralized application, how does it relate to a transaction, what is possible in Bitcoin?
Implement in such applications.
[21:14]
Whoah So. So. So, a decentralized app or app is an app that uses blockchain programs, i.e. smart contracts or apps or whatever, instead of a backend
That is, the backend is usually completely removed. All business logic is implemented on the blockchain, of course. There are cases when there is a small backend, but sometimes it is usually in normal decentralized
applications, that is, decentralized applications, it does not take any part in the work of business logic, that is, all business logic exists and lives on the block there, it is executed with the help of transactions.
Huh, thank you. Such a question from Denis, who would choose to study in practice.
Yes, my personal opinion, Despite the fact that I may be spit on now, I would say that it is ethereal and at first it is solid, it is a language that has absolutely nothing to do with growth.
[22:29]
This is true, but starting with etherium, which has a sea of ​​documentation, a sea of ​​examples, all Usually projects have a referendum, implementations on solid Therefore, in my opinion, if you teach blockchain, start with ether and then move on to
blockchains, which also have smart contracts, This is a salty-ptosuy pit and others, and after that, it's purely My opinion.
It is possible to move to the space to subsidies, that is, to the implementation of blocks, that is, not programs, blockchains, that is, not programs, blockchains, that is, dockets on which you can perform contract decline.
Thank you. Thank you. Great answer. What are the possible ways. Paths
Using blockchain in the future.
Thank you for your question. This is a very, very important question.
Very philosophical. I can't say that Currently, as it is called Degan Degen, this is our slang word among blockchainists, which is deciphered as decenter every line, that is, I don't have this mentality.
[23:48]
Will he change one more? Everything, but first of all blockchain is a mechanism to reduce trust to increase decentralization and for Fold-tolerance, which I mean, for example, if humanity ever wants to
switch For example, to electronic voting, then on one backend or on replicas, to have electronic voting, it will not be as safe as it can be done with the help of blockchain, even private even
which figure does not know the country, but people will be able to immediately receive a public audit, from the box they can see who made which transactions. Of course, you can hide it, but you can at least prove that some specific person voted for some
candidate, anything related to voting, as well as anywhere where there is some kind of trust, where there is some kind of centralization, the blockchain can help to help with that, not to mention centralized finance, the other thing, but first
[24:53]
turn, this In my opinion, these are generally processes.
In which there is trust and it is desirable to get rid of this trust.
Thank you. I would also like to add the following question to this question.
I mentioned that there was a data leak in action and we are wondering how blocking could help with this, because it is not obvious to me now.
So.
So I will explain. The blockchain could not help with this, as I have already said, there are many problems specifically with the action.
Which I would not solve yet. That is, the blockchain, in essence, it would reduce decentralization, reduce centralization at the server level, that is, in people, their identity was not stored on the server but
they have, relatively speaking, in some wallets filled by the state, and in order to perform a transaction, a person had to create this transaction and sign it with a private key, and the private key, for example, a person
[26:05]
could get it by doing this face scan, I don't know what this digital signature is called, that is, the block solves the main problems of the action, it first of all solves the problem.
Centralization and block are not the solution for the action to be good.
Yes, thank you. There is also such a prompting of the question from Ivan. How to get into the file as a collection developer.
Was Thank you for the question. Actually a very relevant question because we are launching an internship program in blockchain development and also in content development and also in content therefore, go to our site and
you will be able to see, but I won't tell much now, because it's not partners, rasconf and fire are spreading, so all the information can be found on the blog site or somewhere.
[27:05]
Well thank you. Let's see what we have. A lot of questions, thank you.
I'm just now what I'm doing now. I'm trying to choose to see which are interesting, which one voted for, we have a question, from Mykola, are there any examples of implementation, blockchain in the real world, to solve some real problem that cannot be solved
in 2 technologies.
Yes, obviously. Obviously. This applies to such possible speedy cases, but for example, if a person wants to conduct some kind of transaction, then if a person does not launch his note, super strong, protect himself with torus, vipian and everything else, then according to the idea, the person created
The wallet is offline on the computer and is not connected to anything. After paying someone with cash to drop money there, a person can spend 100 or 99 9 9 anonymously
a transaction that, in principle, is impossible with 2 technologies due to the fact that all these requests are seen by providers, while if there is no information about the account and no information I have on
[28:21]
attention of providers, services, antitimani, london, etc., we can achieve a very high degree of anonymity of transaction anonymity, which, in principle, will not work with your technologies.
Where I offer the following. Yes, I hear.
I will now give the floor to Andy Theodorko and he wants to ask a question live.
So.
So. Ened Teodorko, please.
Alright!
[29:32]
Thank you for the question. Actually, I can't call myself an expert.
I have not explored this topic very deeply.
But with regard to electronic voting, it is important to remember that, especially in our country, not all people have the opportunity to vote electronically, and while in principle, theoretically, those who live there are quite far from the line
military conflict or there, I don't know, in safe areas everyone can go to their election commission and vote, while people, for example, older people, or people, I don't know if it's politically correct to say that, but lower
social status, there is nothing wrong with that, they may not have computers and the opportunity to vote electronically, while everyone has the opportunity to vote on paper, but here I think that it is important
In general, regarding electronic voting, look at the experience of Estonia, because just a few weeks ago, they had an electronic vote that was quite successful, but they have a much smaller degree of the problems that I have already
[30:46]
mentioned now about the blockchain, we will, I think, implement the blockchain only when we see on a sufficient dataset what problems there are in general with electronic voting.
No, it is not blocked.
Well. So. We ourselves will not be able to start voting on the public blockchain because it will eat up a lot of money.
I'm not ready. Discuss now? To this question because from the real world.
We do not have enough experience with electronic voting to say anything about silent voting.
So I want to make the next announcement that the next session will start soon. If you want to listen, you can exit the next session. If you want to stay on the platform, we will continue the end until we have questions.
[32:00]
Or as long as you have Oleksandr wants to rest, if you want to cover, if you want to stay, we will answer your questions, thank you.
Time goes on.
We will continue like this, I will know about the questions already in chronological order.
Without any filtering, the question follows from.
Julia's information is very interesting and from Rome. Why on the last slide, there was a letter mostly written to our press service.
Perhaps a lesson with children is possible. In general, we first wrote a clear plus, but there is such a rust-raid, that's why I didn't conduct it, and it is widely used and not only in subsidizing that.
So. Exactly.
[33:08]
So. Currently there is also here Currently also Yes.
In general, I am still ready to add that it is now migrating from to its own implementation, if it is at the moment when I worked on it, there were no problems, and it was unstable and so on.
This is an experimental package.
Horror horror I think that answers this question: okay, question.
From anonymous how to verify code in decentralized applications.
Thank you very much for this question. This is actually standard procedure.
In general, as the code is verified, it is verified on block sporers, that is, if we are talking about streaming movies. For example, this is the guy who basically introduced the practice of verifying a lot of contracts, in general, about the reason
of decentralized applications, we cannot in any way verify that the content is authentic and I do not know what exactly the content contains there, logically correct functionality if we do not have graded content.
Some projects. For example, dopensorki their content, although this is not a very common practice regarding the verification of smart contracts, it happens on the blocker of sporrors.
[34:15]
For example, there is such a blockchain from Plaor, maybe I forgot what it is called, the main one for ether and azustannu, it is also called on azscan, we can just have the address.
The flavor of the contract, that is, for diploys, we always have its ebial, that is, the epicetic interface, that is, those transactions that we can perform their parameters, and so on.
To verify the code of this smart contract, we can send sorsko as a developer and get a successful verification there and all the people who want to check whether this smart contract is authentic,
they will primarily look at whether or not.
This contract is verified or not, that is, verification takes place in this way.
Aha. Thank you.
[35:16]
Such: the question of what is the advantage of the blockchain? Before a regular backend?
Thank you for the question. This is quite philosophical, in fact, if we talk about blockchain vs. there are many pros, there are many cons in blockchain compared to the pros. Because the question about the pros is reduced trust. That is, we do not trust
backend usually but we can trust the blockchain thanks to the consensus thanks to the transparency that we see all the transactions we see how the consensus happened if the validators agreed on it or
Miners, we can be sure that the transaction was valid in the same way in decentralized blockchains, that is, blockchains without any ex-control, if you can call it that, they don’t have any
special rights to write blocks out of sequence or call some super special transactions Therefore we can not trust any validator But trusting the general consensus is about trust as well
[36:29]
decentralization We always have public addresses, we always have, we don't always have, but we usually have public identification of validators, according to their accounts.
Some even provide their own epic address torture, because of which we can trust the blockchain as a whole more, while not trusting any individual individual node or individual validator in the system.
I also want to say that the blockchain has almost automatic, horizontal scalelogs. That is, if you have one.
Not to mention, if you have a lot of clients, then essentially each of them could hypothetically have their own package that would give them the data they need.
But this is the advantage of the backend over the string chain in essence.
[37:35]
Oh why?
Because the blockchain executes the code in the consensus phase, all nodes execute it together, that is, from my experience, the blockchain is horizontal in it, it will tilt horizontally only in the case of shards if we are talking about the crime of measures
To her.
or about rolaps for the ether. Thus, the block can be tilted in relation to the execution.
District I'm sorry, what I meant.
What if you have a lot of clients who read the data to have a node, and the bins of the anode, in fact, can give this data and you will not need it.
So? With this 7th Later 100%.
The next question is what is the difference between Nir and Salana, which is better?
In certain aspects, ie Comparing these two.
In Thank you. For the question, I will immediately say that I am not an expert on these blockchains in general, most of my experience was focused on the substrate about what I can say in my opinion, measure is a more traditional blockchain on which you can
[38:46]
it’s much faster to develop than sending holes out of the box, it works like a very convenient blockchain, it’s very convenient to write smart contracts on it when we talk about salt. On the other hand, I personally don’t like programs without Grigorik
I like them, apart from the fact that they do not seem expressive to me, there is also a completely different model of Usolana, well, I will not talk about it for a long time now, but it is very different from the standard one
ether account model, where we have accounts associated with it, associated with some data. It seems to me that the salon programs lack expressiveness, although there are freeboards such as, for example,
what does it solve in general speaking of these 2 blocks in comparison i would choose measure to implement some gabrlns to implement dau to implement
[39:47]
dex However, I obviously chose salana if I needed to make some kind of game, on blocked simply because salana misses so many transactions to make a complete leader.
Thank you. I think this is a good comparison question.
From Artem, do you know that the broadcasts are planned to be rewritten? Okay. What do you think about it?
Thank you. Question. Honestly, I don't know. I personally was not interested in what I think about this.
I think this is absolutely a positive thing.
Because it's not something to rewrite with or plus if it was written on another plus plus because it was basically the majonovdi of the front, in terms of speed, about how we have already seen from the comparison before etheria and gu and
the series at that time before ether worked much faster than because the faster ether works, those users of the blockchain, or we developers on this blockchain, will be more pleasant to use it if this is really planned, my opinion
[41:04]
Absolutely positive from this.
Thank you. The next question from Oleksandr Oleksandr is what is the average salary level in Ukraine for developers in the field of blockchain.
Oho. Well, I would gladly? Answer: to this question. But better.
Search on Gina because it is difficult for me.
Unfortunately, if we talk about outsourced development, I can't reveal the rate matrices. It's better to see public data, for example, on the genie or survey, below.
I can still say that there is public data as it is called Apork And on Work blockchain developer it is from 60 dollars per hour.
[42:08]
So.
Her.
Igor, I also have to say that in this case 100 will be a lot of noise because sometimes people come there who say types and write death contracts, it is just to copy the codes created to change 2 shadows and they say: to typical 1
So.
the flavor of the contract is $50 or something, so this data can be noisy and you have to be careful behind traffic jams.
So good.
This is like a question from Ivan, how anonymous blockchains work and how dangerous they are.
Aha. Thank you in general. Question. I'll tell you right away.
What I don't have deep enough knowledge to fully explain, for example, the way it works. But in general, if we talk about a simple private transaction, how we do it, there are basically 2 approaches, I don't know if it's 1 approach
There are many different approaches, but there is an approach, Manerivsk, led by which I don’t know anything about, I can’t tell you about another approach, it’s zero. In general, a new professional has been collected. That is, evidence, with zero disclosure, it’s like this
[43:17]
A mathematical concept that allows us to convince ourselves of something in reefs?
Without giving him any additional facts, about some event, or about some fact, but with the fact that he is sufficiently confident, in general, if we talk about the mathematical component, very briefly we generate and we describe our problem, in the form
set of a very large number of polynomials. And having a certain set of polynomials, we try to find a target polynomial that solves some equation. This polynomial must divide the sum of the polynomials that are given to us as an input, and at the same time, this
not just some polynomial, from some set of some type, from some field, that is, for example, there are not natural numbers or integers, numbers, we take points from the elliptic curve and our arithmetic takes place in the set
[44:23]
points of an elliptic curve, which is limited by some sufficiently large prime number, it works. Thus, the fact that if I want to transfer money to someone, I generate and some Zyommovych prof and create
request for a transaction and after that, knowing some secret that I told: he can enter this secret to my friend personally, or I wrote him on paper, and simply handed it to him, knowing this secret, he can accept this advertisement on
transaction and receive money. That is, it works roughly like this.
Thank you. So You have now also confused us with the introduction of his Here was And is there a row and now there are other questions.
This This This property. There is a scientific role.
Never another question? Any other tottorialis who explain from scratch?
[45:23]
For Zyronoi teapots, here is Prus.
So. I used them, but I have a diploma on this topic, the Brokfa hacker teaches us Blockchain and I mainly used 2 of these, the best in my opinion, resources 1
resource This is a complete walkthrough of hummorphic transformations.
Humorous transformations for the construction of quadratic quadratic arithmetic programs that were written on their blog 1 1 such a totorio is zikesh zironoch krutoril, walk like this, another
history If we talk about such more applications of the elliptic curve of 12 381 and in general the leveler of profs, this is the block of mine that I mentioned and in the properties it is possible, I do not know
I will share later, but I have such extensive documentation.
According to their and their stars in the system called kinchi and there it goes again, also passing from humorous transformations of elliptic curves to the construction of direct arithmetic schemes for the construction of grain stuffs.
[46:44]
Thank you. Additionally, expand the answer X is probably a step, the answer to the question from Bohdan Can blockchain? Significantly improve the development of artificial intelligence?
So. The short answer is no. Because it is focused on performing some things in Verifa, calculating some things in Wi-Fi, Wi-Fi was me, that is, we can verify some
execution and this is the main focus of the blockchain. On the other hand, norm machines require extremely large resources, and in fact, having a dataset and having a rented cluster, we do not solve any there is no
problems in the field of machines, which can be solved by the blockchain, there are projects, some Russian projects, I remember that a few years ago I was at a conference in Lisbon and there were projects that built decentralized
Clouds that, in theory, could have some typewriters from Jipius in them.
[47:44]
But this is completely different. This is what the rental itself is all about.
Rental of computing power.
That is, the short answer is that the blockchain machines do not work together in particular.
Thank you. Thank you. He told so many things. You are also a student, so there is such a question.
How much time did it take you to study the technologies Alexander.
E: Thank you very much. Question. In fact, it didn’t take me much time, it was possible somewhere, one and a half months of reading: I don’t know any books and writing, primitive programs are still possible after that, I spent a week on race lenses if someone didn’t
used I strongly advise you if you start after having dusted off some primitive project at the university, just a package with a base, another package, and after that, knowing already having practical but quite thorough theoretical
[48:59]
knowledge about blockchain technology, which I learned at the Faculty of Informatics of the Kyiv-Mohyla Academy Because we are taught blockchain.
I just went to an interview for a job and was accepted. So the study time was about a month and a half plus 1 petruee how much time will it take you and how long will you do it regarding the study of the block for me it is a long story I still
from a young age Yes. I was fascinated by Blochyn. That is, 17-14-14, it was exactly 14-15 years, when ether appeared, when dubs first appeared, and then, I was interested in it in a speculative way
I have to say, technically, it was about 3 months of study, but at the university, that is 1 lecture and 1 practice per week.
[50:05]
I'm ready to continue.
Since we send you now from time to time. There are 4 questions: that's all that's left, so I'll continue the question, give it anonymously, you can briefly explain any solutions.
If there is a word for short, really short, Nir is Garrement Dow is Dex is some kind of land-boring.
Salty This is gamification. This is writing something that requires a very large Play: Poltawood blockchain on which nothing can be written because it is Riley Chai if we talk about the Substratum, then these are blocks that require a high
level of customization. That is, it is a division of the dispatching technology, it is a private blockchain, it is a blockchain that requires very fast finality or identification, validators are very convenient vbs third if you need
build a network from scratch. Then obviously I chose compared to hyperverge factories and so on.
[51:18]
While a great answer, the question opened up a probably a little abstract question, if I'm wrong, the tournament protocol recently added with children that allows you to write smart contracts.
IS.
On or eskript if time and jazz boil allow you to write the same one for contracts then what to do what to do it for OK, months is a bit wrong question: because because of such they do not allow you to write.
I'm not. Actually, if we are talking about jazz-hliptyte-sp, then yes. But there is such a thing called Asym biscript that can really generate in Bessebel. However, this is the question, I don’t know why we want
write Some kind of server, by the way. Instead of doing it on my own, and to be honest with you, in most cases, when I don't have a large team, I choose to write a service on my own instead of a trust, but once,
[52:21]
generates very small binaries at once and a small runtime and If you have listened to previous presentations there, previous presenters provided arguments for why exactly to use once in order to write a pool. That is, depending on
the language that we use in it turns out to be different, so it happened that it is small in size and that it is small and safe in size, most likely, these are the reasons.
So I wanted to add what you have. Actually, this is the purpose of compilation, and I still don’t know whether there are any projects that take the general codescape and turn it into a webspace, that is, maybe it will be some
[53:24]
a subset of the obsepta, but not the engineering of Jin as joskib, and you can not take the time of the scripts and stuff them.
You have it. That is, you can, but it will be very, very difficult.
Yes. The next question from Danilo is carried out in a manner in my opinion, fleas cannot replace Because people are not ready to pay for any of their actions.
Why Thank you. For questions. Regarding this, there are slightly 2 different opinions about me about paying for any of my actions How I feel about the manner I feel neutral Because from this point of view, in principle, I cannot in any way
to relate to technology that Exists for a purpose because there I don't know, is it?
That is, it exists. It has its application. Do I personally use the manner no.
[54:56]
Statify How many people have YouTube Premium subscriptions How many people buy games?
In the walls, how many people there I don't know, rent movies on netflix or subscribe to Mark Netflix people are willing to pay much more, much more than you think: and in much larger volumes because
pay discretely for each of your actions I personally even liked it more.
If I'm using an app I know it's a locked app, I have some confidence.
The fact that the keys are stored in me. If we are talking about non-studio solutions, I have lost a little about the replacement of 2 m.
This Degan mentality is Dekhan, I repeat decentralization.
So I'm also not sure that blockchains will replace vector and first of all it's because of execution I would say, because of the speed and volume of execution or if we're talking about salana because of reliability because we've seen many times how
[56:05]
salt was turned off, but I don't think that the problem of replacing web 2 on the block lies precisely in the level of payment for each of its actions.
Thank you. And the last question from Artem Oleksandr, you said that you are interested in cryptography.
The first cryptocurrency using the example of bitcoin and ether using interpolation on ethical curves, what algorithm is used in.
Thank you for the question. There is no encryption on elliptic curves and no encryption in general if we are talking about encryption, if we are thinking about ace 256 or some other encryption algorithms
that's nothing; this is not used, it was learned because all the data, they are public lyptic blood, are used only in the picryai. That is, the public infrastructure is that we have a secret key, we have a public
key The secret key is used and are used to generate a public one when signing a transaction But I think that if I am asked this question: then it is all clear, the salty plate is also obvious, they use elliptical
[57:20]
the curves about bitcoin and ether can be said that they use an elliptic curve called Isidia, Safe or is it a signature algorithm or an elliptic curve I can't remember but
verbs of measure or salty I think that some of them may use Shrunkel signatures, i.e. SRSR 2 5 19 over the Crimea Beliz 12 381 but more specifically about their
Traversing the infrastructure of secondary private keys.
I'm sorry, I don't know.
In Dore. Thank you. On this You I deprive you.
You answered the most questions. Which I saw at today's performances and I Thank you very much for your performance It was a great presentation and thank you to our audience.
[58:26]
Something was completed and the questions were passed on this will be Aa.
Maybe it is possible, live questions excursion.
There is no one.
What is good?
Atom Thank you for now. It was wonderful.
Thank you. Listeners. Thank you. Question. Thank you for not presenting for helping and what if my contacts.
You will be able to find out who was interested in the internship and what we continue to describe in the best programming language in the world.
I join

=== ROW 276 | f015635 | https://youtube.com/watch?v=NWJlLWiWYMw | 2023-11-29 | youtube ===
[00:04]
Andrei Listochkin: Hello, everybody!
Andrei Listochkin: That's a confession.
Andrei Listochkin: So once again, for those of you have ha haven't seen me before before today i'm andre I I I used to be one of the people or main organizers of Ukraine and Ross community.
Andrei Listochkin: And now i'm kind of like, and i'm helping with this conference as well. I work at feral systems, mostly doing a rust. Trainings sometimes contribute to rationalizer and
Andrei Listochkin: work on online projects as well. And today i'm very, very happy to introduce you all to look up all Mieri, who is a software engineer at aws.
Andrei Listochkin: and in addition to that is a pro, very probably a prolific blogger conference. He gives tops at conferences, and he wrote a very, very good book about Ross
[01:07]
Andrei Listochkin: 0 to production and rust is not only a great book for us to follow, or in the language. But for software engineering in general. I remember about 15 or 20 years ago I was reading a similar kind of like full stack book about
at the time. It was something like Php. And my sequel and that book gave me so much
Andrei Listochkin: insight into understanding how web technology in general works. So if you are new to the back end development in general, or building back and services, you would
Andrei Listochkin: you? You would appreciate this book a lot more. I'm only salty about one tiny bit at the beginning, where I look recommended Intell. A. J. Plugin over us
Andrei Listochkin: other than that. It's a perfect book. I really like it. It's one of my favorite books I've read with that, said I'm very, very happy to give you the stage.
Luca Palmieri: Well, thanks a lot. Times, Ray for a very nice introduction, and it's an honor to be here on this event, so very happy to be on this line up today. Now you know farther. I do. Let's get into the meat of things. This. So today is about reasoning about Rus code. So we're not going to be talking necessarily about writing rough programs and what you can do with trust, which is, you know, certainly interesting.
[02:26]
Luca Palmieri: But we're going to be talking about how we can reason about press code that it's written, and more importantly, how we can integrate that reasoning into our workflow to make sure that the code keeps doing what we want it to do so. Study can offices, and you know, surroundings.
And in particular, we're focused on rust talks to the format, which is a fairly new feature from our stock
Luca Palmieri: that is not been widely publicized. It's okay. basically aims to fix that introduction for me for those of you. Haven't met yet. I'm: a senior in the Us. I previously worked with Layer as a principal engineer.
Luca Palmieri: and you can find me on Twitter. The nickname is, I go look at.
Luca Palmieri: I brought a bunch of stuff in the rest. Ecosystem, workshops, blog posts, crates of these kinds, and you can find most of it in Github
Luca Palmieri: and I'm also the other. Oh, yes, 0 to production bus. So an introduction to the Ken Development, the title says opinionated. So that's why I recommended into Dj. But I was analyzing. It is also very good.
[03:26]
Luca Palmieri: so that today's agenda is divided into 4 sections, living with rust, and then Macros pressed doctors and formats and limitations just to send you all like reasonable expectations over what you can do with the different things.
Luca Palmieri: Okay, living with us now for your scenario that most of you might have been into. You are the work, or you. You're with your organization, and you need to be in the new system.
Luca Palmieri: and you are there are that in the room. So you, the page and the date, and eventually just wear down everybody else and convince them that the new system should be taken in.
Luca Palmieri: So you choose first a few months plus buying your, you know, ends down coding, building this new system, and eventually you're responsible for tens of thousands of lines of rust which make it into your production environment.
Luca Palmieri: And this is usually the point in time where you know you go your blog, or you go on, Youtube, or you go ready. Then you'd say, we build our system in rust, and everybody pops here and your Fp. And you get caramel points.
[04:27]
Luca Palmieri: Yeah. Reality. This is problematic, because now you have tens of thousands of lines for us, which is very cool. But you know, cause the liability. The more code you have, the more issues you might have with that code, the more issues you might have over time evolve in the current base to satisfy new needs.
Luca Palmieri: So a question that comes in mind is, how do we reason about that code like you? Think of code, As you know, we have a state buildings. Not now you on you on a little, you know roughly, and you need to drive neatrades and create new roads. And just you know, make sure that that CD. Remains nice and flourish.
Luca Palmieri: So how do we do that?
Luca Palmieri: And let's look at some questions that you know you might want to ask. So let's assume that you're writing a library which is gonna be published, and it's say, oh, perhaps it's an internal library that your company uses to do something.
Luca Palmieri: Libraries? Api: so what users can use from your library are very, very important. You have the contract between you and the user and you want to make sure not to close breakage against those Api's, or at least not to cause unnecessary breakage.
[05:28]
Luca Palmieri: A particular point of contention it's which third party types are exposed to your Api. So your Api and expose a public function that takes, for example, a chrono daytime.
Luca Palmieri: and so kernel breaks their Api, and you won't update chrono suddenly. You have broken your Api
Luca Palmieri: because they break it to your public interface. and so it's reasonable to expect that you're very, very careful about which types you expose from other crates in your own Api.
Luca Palmieri: Now, if your public Api is a you functions and a couple of types, this is the kind of stuff that you can do my own like. You're a Vpr. Really hard, you know, with your goggles on, and you make sure our stuff doesn't sleep through.
Luca Palmieri: But if you have hundreds of thousands of functions, this is the example of the Us. SDK doing it manually. Doesn't really scale like you need a tool that you can say. I want all of these types to be exposed through my public Api.
Luca Palmieri: and if anything by mistake exposes something new, you want to be warned, so can we do this?
[06:31]
Luca Palmieri: Another example is enforcing architecture of constraints, so it's very common in between applications to have examiner architectures also called, you know, ports and adopters architecture
Luca Palmieri: when you have a domain core and you have adopters, for you know
Luca Palmieri: persistence, data, basis, queues, and similar things. And you are your domain core to be isolated from the implementation details. So you want it not to depend on a specific implementation.
Luca Palmieri: and you can represent those with modules, and one way would be, we want to make sure that this module does not depend on his other module. Can you do that with us today.
Luca Palmieri: not really. And then we can get it to the specifics which are, you know, more.
Luca Palmieri: They can development type of things which in points require that this pr change summing points that were previously authenticated to now be not authenticated. Was it intentional? Perhaps Perhaps not. But can we flock it 20? That
Luca Palmieri: or you might ask in a big monolith, and you want to do some stuff around the database, which in points is accessing a certain table like who is actually quiet in the users table.
[07:36]
Luca Palmieri: and that may be useful to you to understand the impact of making certain changes. All these are very, very reasonable questions and one common technique that you can cruise in the breast ecosystem.
Luca Palmieri: It's been called to the constraints. Then you want to be through inside the type system. This is also known as making illegal state and representable, so forcing codes to be correct by construction.
Now this is a good technique we can generally suggest we are trying to model your domain and make sure the stuff stays correct.
Luca Palmieri: but it's not a simple bullet like you can't always do this. Sometimes the constraints you want to enforce are just not amenable to be represented into the type system.
Luca Palmieri: Other times you can do it.
Luca Palmieri: But man, is it complicated like, you know you end up building this pyramid. It's up, and the others are terrible, and you know it's possible but that doesn't mean you should do it
Luca Palmieri: so generally, you know. Not a good thing. So when the tools we know fail, what can we do
[08:36]
Luca Palmieri: and come on?
Luca Palmieri: So when you think about, you know, reasoning about rust code. One way to discard. That is a matter of programming. We're programming program meetings. And when I say that the programming invest my mind. My mind, by association goes to Marcus. That's the main tool. The rust provides you for doing Meta program.
Luca Palmieri: That's just 2 types of markers, marker rules and procedural markets. Marker rules are also known as a macro by examples that primarily geared toward co generation. So a marker rule looks pretty much like this you have the marker name, which in this case is times 10,
Luca Palmieri: and you have the pattern that you want to match, and the code that you want to generate. If we match that button so you can think of a macro rules on the line as a match statement. You're matching it. Ross impacts on the left, and you are generating a bunch of code on the route.
Luca Palmieri: and this doesn't mean it's simple, you know there's a lot of different patterns you can match, and then there's design patterns you can use to make certain things possible, and you know whatnot.
[09:38]
Luca Palmieri: So the argument like the shape looks simple, but you can do a lot of things with this very flexible, nonetheless, primarily for generation. And the problem we wanna you know, solve today is, I'll do a reason about Russell. I don't care about generating code. I want to reason about the about the call that yet. So this not useful
Luca Palmieri: next procedure of Marcus. These are more promising. Let's look at an example. You have my function, and this is a not even using the tracing instrument procedure. Monitor, setting the level of the spawn to trace.
Luca Palmieri: Now, what this actually does is something like this.
Luca Palmieri: You have a macro. So this is the into instrument symbol. This Macro takes a bunch of arguments that you can think of, as you know, function arguments. But for the micro.
Luca Palmieri: and then the micro applies to school. In this case. The item that the market applies to is the my function definition. So the entirety of it from Pop all the way to the closing price
Luca Palmieri: and put this the sugars into. So what the compiler does when you use the instrument, Macro is, it calls the macro function. So these exist in the create that defines needs to remarked it's a special function annotated with promontro attribute takes his input the arts so level. Eco: trace the item so from path to the closing grace.
[10:51]
Luca Palmieri: That's a bunch of stuff. and now puts out a bunch of documents.
Luca Palmieri: So if you do, you know the architect thing when you do boxes in address. A monitor is a bunch of tokens as input some processing logic bunch of tokens is output.
Luca Palmieri: Now, the processing logic is, you know, rust is just the Us. Function and bus functions can do a lot of things in particular. They can do some facts.
Luca Palmieri: Now, some people would say that this is a problem, and that'd be right, because you can think of procedural markers as arbitrary code execution. I can pile, find we localize it. So you can do whatever you want inside of procedural macro, and you're getting a in with a specific part of the press program that's being compiled that was marked with this matter.
Luca Palmieri: and when you know you have, I was to record the execution. You can start to do punky things. For example, you could say it the
Luca Palmieri: to be analyzed later. So this becomes a way, you know, to demarcate some specific spots in the code base, which then you can pull all the way in one place, and then do some post processing.
[11:57]
Luca Palmieri: You can also do nastier things, so that, such as you know, performing at the goals.
An example of this is, you could annotate all your parties with a macro.
Luca Palmieri: and then the macro could go and ask the database. Is this quite important?
Luca Palmieri: And the cool thing about this is it's it's it's called c. Collects. So Sequel x is, you know, Body Macro takes your Friday, which is within, you know, as a sequel tax credit turns out, prepare step into the database that the base says this query is okay. These are the types of the things, or you know this part is not okay.
Luca Palmieri: and then sequel expense, compilation, or generates code that maps the results. So the found that you can execute side effects in procedure. Macro is useful because it allows you to. Do. You know interesting things? It would otherwise be possible. What's not as nice is that you can control what side effects the procedural Macro can execute. So that part is a bit dangerous.
Luca Palmieri: but not this topic of this talk. No. all this sounds very cool, but what you need to remember, and this is the important part is that you're working with tokens. What does this mean? So let's assume that you have a sequel on the score party procedure. Mark that does some punky things with your party.
[13:03]
Luca Palmieri: Now we the factory, the invocation, and instead of passing to seek on this code, the actual quadratic. So you know. So that start from users, we assign that to some, and then we pass the constant per month.
Luca Palmieri: Well, we just broke it because the Macro can resolve the party token because for the Macro it just got, you know, as input aquiry token as no way to know that query is a constant, and the that concept is associated To select that from users
Luca Palmieri: the obvious thing would be asking the compiler, you know. Tell me what this is, but this is not possible, because there is no compile time, reflection, Api.
Luca Palmieri: So you know, token zoom tokens out what this talking means. You Don't know. So you have no way to resolve the input part of a function asking what the input parameters of a certain things are.
Luca Palmieri: But just outside the rail of what from Microsoft can do today.
Luca Palmieri: Now, if you're really determined, as I happen to be from time to time, you could say, Well. Okay, Compiler is just a bunch of us code. It exist, indeed, that we can invoke it as a library. So you don't give me the Api. I want. I just go and take the Api's I need.
[14:08]
Luca Palmieri: Now, if you've ever been to the you know, Rusty could base it's kind of a big boy like I think account 40, 45 crates in here. These are noon 3, though you need to wire them together. It's messy. Like you really need to be extremely motivated to do this.
Luca Palmieri: and most importantly, the Api surpass is massive. We know stability guarantees like no this creates, or the few of these creates exist on create sail. They are just internal implementation of the compiler.
Luca Palmieri: The compiler guarantees that the public interface of the compiler itself is stable. So that's the language. It's on the library, the cli in this. but the internal soup that makes it possible that is as simple as necessary, so any commit could break some of this internal Api's.
Luca Palmieri: And what this means is that if you build your tools around those Api's you need to put in a lot of maintenance work just to keep your tool building, which, if you have, you know, leave the time. You usually want to allocate that to make them progress on the problem you're trying to solve now, keeping up with breaking changes which are undocumented from a bunch of internal crates of the Us. Compiler.
[15:13]
Luca Palmieri: So Terry is speaking strongly, you know, advise you not to do this if you're trying to build something that does intersection for us
Luca Palmieri: this where we get to the you know interesting part which is for us to just.
Luca Palmieri: I think the chef maybe it's split up to the properties for this one.
Luca Palmieri: Now if I say rest, Doc once again, you know, mind mapping exercise, you say, let's talk. I think docs are the rest. So like this is the mental connection. I: yeah. So it goes at this page just specific, you know, Gray and black team and all this stuff sorted in the way my brain has learned to be wired in the past 5 years.
Luca Palmieri: Now, once again, boxes in address. No, because we're architects press stock raspberries the input that's not processing. HTML is out. and somebody who is very smart. Well, why don't we just, you know, use different performance. So instead of doing just h smell, we can do Jason.
Luca Palmieri: and the cool thing is that it's the same information as talk to us, but it's in a machine possible format, because the HTML is G for browsers, so you know you could scrape it and try to, you know. Find things in there once again. Not a great thing, because that changes all the time, as it, you know, suits. That's not a representation from a visual perspective.
[16:28]
Luca Palmieri: Just a with this. That's a lot nicer because it's meant to be a machine possible for both. It's currently a nightly this feature, so it's not stable yet. The Rfc. Days back from June 2020,
Luca Palmieri: but it's one of those nightly features that there's a clear part of secularization is in a very good state, like I've been using it for the past 12 months. It works like it is a few bugs that No, Major, most of them have been fixed.
Luca Palmieri: The team is very responsive. So it's in what that isn't that phase of nightly which is like using now to give feedback before we stabilize it. It's like it's workable. so don't be afraid
Luca Palmieri: you can try to yourself. So you know you go a cargo plus nightly to tell Desktop that you want to use the nightly to chain
Luca Palmieri: press stock. I want to document my library.
Luca Palmieri: and I want you up to 4 months to be Jason, and you pass that the unstable options, because you want to use the special options that might be only so. That's just a way to say, I know what i'm doing. Let me do it.
Luca Palmieri: If you do that, you get that isn't it is in the target folder. I think it's going to be target, slash, slash the name of the library you're documenting. Now let's look at an example. So what that means. If I look at a stretch in the Jason representation.
[17:38]
Luca Palmieri: and I'm gonna use a struct from cargo chef which is a tool I maintain. So target arcs. This is a bunch of logs. You know, benches test examples of targets. The tel cargo chef body needs to compile.
Luca Palmieri: If we look at how this is representing the Jason, it looks like this. So every item in the Jason as an identity partner, which is unique, and that's 0 calling 12. Call on 1620
Luca Palmieri: inside that item. What do we have? We have to create? That item belongs to how that is 0. 0 is a special number. It means it belongs to the crates for which the jazzer and documentation was generated. So since we generated that just a documentation for Karbushcha, and this is defined inside.
Luca Palmieri: These are then gets kind of the 0,
Luca Palmieri: then it's the name of the struct. So to the darts the stuck is public. So basically it's the public. This was private. This would be private, otherwise would be different things.
Luca Palmieri: And then you have a kind. So you can think of this as that, you know, an
Luca Palmieri: and the kind which is on the possible type of items that you can have in there. In this case the struct so inner contains so client contains struct. And then in your contain the things that are specific structs.
[18:46]
Luca Palmieri: Yeah. Obviously, you have different kinds of struct. So we have another, you know, in I mean there, which is once again kind.
Luca Palmieri: So you have units, tracks which have no fields. You have 2 all strikes which have fields without names, and you that you have playing stocks, which is exactly what we have here. So struck with fields and types. This is a plane struct which has a bunch of fields. Each of the fields is his own item.
Luca Palmieri: And then you know, it's good about genetics, implementations, implementation points that both methods on the type and trades that the type implements.
Luca Palmieri: But you know everything that you want to know about Target? Are. It's here like it's encoded, and you know it's linked together. It is like rough of information.
Luca Palmieri: and you can follow the Ids. You know it's like following the stars and Peter Pond.
Luca Palmieri: and you go there and you say, what are the fields? And you can, for example, get benches. So once again, benches is a field on a type defined in this great, so it's creating 0. It has a zoom identifier. It's public. The kindly start field in this case, because it's not field.
Luca Palmieri: I think this is a struct field. We want to know what the type is type. Once again it's an enum which has various options. This case is a
[19:54]
Luca Palmieri: This is quite cool now
Luca Palmieri: pass in the Jason can be tiresome, so good news. You don't have to do it. A tool does it for you. It's called raw stock Types is maintained by the Rust project. So every time they release some changes to the Jason format. They release a new version of those Doc types to create sale.
Luca Palmieri: and he passes the Jason into. So you just go here, say, pass the whole thing, and then you're working with this kind of like, you know. Instruct so it's already very simple. It's still blind.
Luca Palmieri: Now, the other thing that is really exciting is
Luca Palmieri: that this thing is versioned.
Luca Palmieri: and this is very, very important, like the reason procedural markers can do so little as you like. The reason they're forced to work with tokens
Luca Palmieri: is because rust as a project doesn't want to stabilize internal implementation details of drastic compiler or us the language. So if you provide, for example, introspection api's like reflection, compile time, and then you need to introduce a feature that will break one of those intersection 8&nbsp;h. What do you do?
[20:57]
Luca Palmieri: Is lining? Is the compiled reflection. Api, you know, is that 1 point of whatever as to can that break is on, you know.
Luca Palmieri: Interface, that's a 3 key one. So by reusing the scope of that Api reduces the chance that they need to be broken
Luca Palmieri: rest. Dot. Jason took this into account from the beginning, and so it has a format version which means it is stable enough to be useful. So you know you can encode what format versus a part, and your tool can reject inputs based on that.
Luca Palmieri: But it also leads the door open to evolution. So Once these get stop device, they can still release new format virtues, obviously at the lower pace. Because you don't want to break everybody every week, every 6 weeks, but it'll allow you to leave that door and jar. So that's a very good mechanism.
Luca Palmieri: No.
Luca Palmieri: as I said, rest, Docs Jason is a nightly, so it's not stable yet, but using nightly for tooling, which is not exactly, you know, using that you for the code you're compiling the grants in production is a much lower bar, and so a bunch of tool already exist. They use rest of this, and i'm going to go through. You know. Some one number by vulnerable mentions
[22:02]
Luca Palmieri: number one, and probably the one that every single one of you should check out it's called it's a tool to verify. If a new version of your plate contains breaking changes.
Luca Palmieri: What it does. It's very simple conceptually generates the chasing recommendation from the last release version of your print generates the Jason representation, for for example, your Pr. Code.
Luca Palmieri: and then compares them, and it's like, is there any change here? That is a very major. They can change like you remove the public field.
Luca Palmieri: It's something they used to be send in sync no longer sentencing. So also you know the 3 key ones that you might not think about, because they're not. Obviously you look at the Pr. And this should be part of your Ci. If you maintain a create, that's a very good idea to add these, using your checks so that you can
Luca Palmieri: more easily avoid releasing, You know. unintentional making changes on a patch or minor
[23:03]
Luca Palmieri: another. One is kind of go check external types. This is used by the Us. SDK to solve the problem I mentioned in the beginning what types are exposed from third party creates in my public Api.
Luca Palmieri: This is part of the Ws. For Sdkci, and make sure that they don't, you know. unintentionally start depending on an additional third party crates beyond the ones that are explicitly.
Luca Palmieri: This, once again is built in top rest of chasing generate, which is in dots, Walk. The Chasen find all the types that are exposed to that I've created a from 0, and verify if they are allowed or not allowed.
Luca Palmieri: And then there is something I am building personally, which is paddocks, a new rascal framework which is not available yet, so you can go and install it from that by design. And this because it's very alpha and partially working, but you know not recommended for any usage at this point in time.
Luca Palmieri: and what this framework does, which is very different from others. It's, it does dependence, injection, which some of you would say cool, and some of you are saying, oh, that is injection. But the cool part is that it doesn't compile time. So
[24:07]
Luca Palmieri: doesn't have to run time. We look at your graph of dependencies and then generate the code that's gonna run at runtime and just output it to a pile, and you can probably as a normal page. So it's absolutely 0 on time of branch, and since it, you know, does this dependence? Injectory compile time can be some interesting optimizations that would not otherwise be possible?
Luca Palmieri: The way it works well. It's not very simple, but conceptually you specify all the constructors that the the request handlers for your Api. So you say this is how you build a path. This is how you'd be. The Hdp. Find is that you build the logger, and when that request comes at these Uri, I want you to invoke this request.
Luca Palmieri: and then puppets build the call graph, which is what you see represented here, you know once again boxes and hours. So steam, file request, handler. We look in the rest of Jason and say, okay, what are the inputs, this?
Luca Palmieri: And for each of those that we go do we have a constructive for those who will invoke it other new box other than other.
Luca Palmieri: And then those of themselves might have multiple inputs. And we do this process. We possibly press talk chasing without inputs. Okay, we have a constructor for those and go. And so this generates a call graph. And then we do good generation by walking the graph.
[25:18]
Luca Palmieri: And you know
Luca Palmieri: bunch of interesting things to be done here, and such such as auto concurrency, and other things that are more in my mind than implementing this stage, so I mentioned it because it's a what is my evenings on
Luca Palmieri: cool?
Luca Palmieri: No. I spent the last 50&nbsp;min, probably hyping up rest of chasing. And so, you know, some of you might think this is the solution to all problems. And so this section is intending to throw a bunch of border on those expectations, and, you know, bring you back to a more sensible level of enthusiasm.
Luca Palmieri: So it's not a super bullet. And let's look at Why, first of all.
Luca Palmieri: a lot of information is in there that doesn't mean it's easy to use, or it's possible for you to make sense of it.
Luca Palmieri: as I should before you know, structs and enums will have links, for example, to the traits they implement. But if I give you a specific type like you know path. My struct. Does this satisfy a specific prebound? This is a very completely.
because the pack is generic, so there might be a trait implemented for it. But that rate might be conditional on the genetic type, implementing some other stuff, or having certain, you know, lifetime parameters.
[26:28]
Luca Palmieri: And so, before, you know, if you are implementing the rest of it, over which, trust me, is that you can to get a piece of cook. But you probably don't want to be re-implementing, unless that's your own project.
Luca Palmieri: And so yes, the information about it is there you can do some basic reasoning about it but like going anything beyond that it's really really difficult.
Luca Palmieri: The second thing that is missing is that anything that is not visible through the Api of your functions is invisible in Rostock, because Rust Doc is designed to do documentation. So documentation care about the function signature, the input types. Yeah, the output types. This concept
Luca Palmieri: what happens in the body no idea.
Luca Palmieri: So if we get back to the question that I was asking the beginning, which is, that's module, that's dependent on why we still can't answer this question with. we can answer a weaker question, which is, does Module X.
Luca Palmieri: Do? What do functions in Module x, or types using their public? Api. Any type from Module Y. We can answer that question because we can check the Api. But if something happens in the function, body like invoking you are function defining what you want it, we can see it so. Question still an answerable, which is said.
[27:42]
Luca Palmieri: but, generally speaking, like I like to think of breastlock, Ch. And as the beginning of, you know, giving tools to the masses to into respect class codes, so not everything that you know needs to reason about rascals, and they stop, and they compiler. And you don't have to go and deal the new rust
Luca Palmieri: content. If you want a reason about the scope which is fundamentally what rationalize it it, which is cool, but also like a gigantic, massive project that you probably know one of them yourself. and there are more tools that are coming online in this space. And there are, you know, initiatives around stabilizing near. So the intermediate representation or some variation of that.
Luca Palmieri: And I think getting tools to reason about rescue is gonna be critical to get Russ to succeed at scale. As people write hundreds of thousands of lines at Br. They will need to to manage, and some of these tools will be in the open. Some of the tools will be built specifically for their projects, so they need ways to do that building themselves.
Luca Palmieri: and I want to give you something that will see motor. This, you know. This is just an opportunity to get more people building, and you know, for my interest, and that interest will be able to lead to more things, and everything will be good.
[28:49]
Luca Palmieri: so that this is the end, and if you have any questions is the moment.
Andrei Listochkin: Thank you so much. Thank you. Thank you.
Andrei Listochkin: A lot of applauses. We do have some questions or right, and turns out i'm a co-host cannot kind of put my own questions in the list, so that's in mind
Andrei Listochkin: so
Andrei Listochkin: I won't be asking them any particular order, but just in general right. I think you've touched what's the advantages of Jason compared to HTML?
Andrei Listochkin: I would up to that. Is there any information that we can see in rust in that is not available as a in the Json at the moment?
Luca Palmieri: Not that i'm aware of, like from my own experiments and what I've done, and also from all I understand that as talk to base is structured, this is pretty much information, part of the
[29:50]
Luca Palmieri: If there wasn't, I think that would be considered a bug by the Maintainer's arrest stock, and, as much you know, be fixed to report it even enough volunteer time to do it. So from that kind of be able to say it's the same
Andrei Listochkin: that's cool. You've mentioned that the Json format itself is a version. How like, how? How about the raspberries of Jason Crate? How, how stable that grade is! Does it change your phone? Doesn't, break compatibility often, etc.
Luca Palmieri: that changes when the 4 months changes.
Luca Palmieri: It might change more often, because you know some things that are not breaking from. You know a Jason wire 4 month. Representation may be breaking from Ross. Great presentation
Luca Palmieri: doesn't break very often like the only times, but I know this is because they've made some. They can changes the B. The format version.
[30:52]
Luca Palmieri: It's also important to know this. That is a very big rates, as in like. You know, the format is big. It encompasses a lot of times and information, and realistically, most of your tools, Don't. Use the entire of it like, for example, you know, touches a lot of functions and methods, and you know, struct fields
Luca Palmieri: perhaps doesn't touch. You know, a bunch of other stocks in there, and when I usually down, press the pipes across breaking versions.
Luca Palmieri: I need to fix a couple of things, but like adding that I can do in like under 30&nbsp;min, and it's a big, so it's good.
Andrei Listochkin: That's cool. Do you think? Like in future this Jason representation and this create, can like build a way to compile time, reflection in general, like as a compiler feature.
Luca Palmieri: I don't know like a or do you think it's better to keep it as a separate tool.
Luca Palmieri: so i'll, you know I would enjoy having compost and reflection would make a lot of my stuff obsolete, which I see as a wheel. It's not easy to do it on top of us of chosen. We can see that that would be slide. You know
[32:04]
Luca Palmieri: little bit of a hawk, but you know a sensible one, given out of strain side of the objectives. If you wanted proper reflection, I think that would be in the using. You know the actual r see itself, instead of being, you know, like an appendix of the documentation tool.
Luca Palmieri: What I hope is gonna add them is that the project for the best project is going to see what is going to be built on top of the stock chasing realize. You know there's interest here, and you know this is the use cases
Luca Palmieri: that acquire some of this functionality. and then from there we can open a composition around.
Luca Palmieri: Should we prioritize this, what should they leave? Should it look like, and potentially make their way to proper compulsion. Now the but time, reflection, Api, is a complex topic for a variety of reasons.
Luca Palmieri: especially with respect to markers, because if you are inside the micro, and you, wanna you know, Ask, for example, what is the type of X that assumes the type. Resolution has already happened.
[33:05]
Luca Palmieri: But then you will generate a bunch of code, and that might change. There is also type resolution. So you know it's a very messy situation.
Luca Palmieri: Well, what rationalize it does. For example, what products does is like. We don't wanna like we don't operate inside. You know the process of comparting the crate. What we want to do is we want to do reflection
Luca Palmieri: on a compile create so like as the unit is finished. I want to ask questions around that unit which, asking the questions can change the answer. Type of thing like the Observer doesn't influence the results which I think is a simpler problem to solve.
Luca Palmieri: and perhaps more about. You know a matter of finding the right Api is, and seeing all those integrating. But
the
Andrei Listochkin: yeah
Andrei Listochkin: people will are fascinating if it's Proc macros. So you ask some very, very interesting question like, is that a way to design a macro in such a way that people could potentially extend the behavior of a macro with the functions that you provide somehow like.
[34:07]
Andrei Listochkin: not only as a sequence of attributes, but something more elaborate. And I don't think there is an easy way to do that, to be honest.
Luca Palmieri: Not that I'm aware, unless you are willing to hear me the crimes.
Andrei Listochkin: Yeah, like i'm, i'm thinking like at derive Macros in particular right? They allow you to expose certain attribute. Macros
Andrei Listochkin: so you could potentially have.
Andrei Listochkin: and in general, like using attributes you can give function names adjust.
Andrei Listochkin: There is no way to call this function anyway, so but you could potentially do an ffi like call, do I? I don't know. I mean you can enable customize in a separate process and ask questions. You know, about the codes. But then you get a little bit of a like, you know loop situation. And
Luca Palmieri: yeah, it's pretty, though, like I didn't that. That's the main point. It's studying bridal like, you know that there's a university which I could have implemented polex on prop markers, but, like I, faculty level, was reaching over 9,000, and I was like, this is just skills very bad, so you can. You know you can
[35:16]
Luca Palmieri: 2 complex things. I think Debbie is an example of like implementing something that looks very similar to like that call graph.
Luca Palmieri: But you know that code is no straight or what? No easy invite you to have a look. What that looks like.
Andrei Listochkin: Yeah, I got on this on the side now, and I got mentioned. I get to know that another a next talk is starting. So if you want to go to the next talk with these Alexander Mikhailenka evolution of blockchains written rust you get you. You can switch to that room.
Andrei Listochkin: and we'll continue on with our Q. A. Like my personal question like, have you looked at what kind of like, what kind of data rationalize I can provide you
Andrei Listochkin: as a.
Luca Palmieri: But I found it a bit difficult to use. Well, that's true. This to this. So one argument is.
[36:18]
Luca Palmieri: what do you say? Ease of use, like, I find using rest. Analyzer as a library a little bit cumbersome. Perhaps not. This cumbersome, as you know. Good! Stopping roughly a little bit.
Luca Palmieri: I was be scared by the interface like that. One is not to speak.
Luca Palmieri: The other one is, this is a slightly from focus. So.
Luca Palmieri: depending on what type of this case you're trying to serve. You place a different amount of importance and correct this.
Luca Palmieri: And I think rest Analyzer starts to be useful more than it starts to be correct, and that place the perfect paid off for, an Id like
Luca Palmieri: I want to provide you, You know, good suggestions and good intersections that work on you know 99.9 of the cases, and what they don't. Work is fine. I might just, you know, drop on ever, or suggest something is slightly incorrect
Luca Palmieri: for the type of stuff that i'm doing, which is, you know, trying to. For example, understand all your code looks like, and then based on that, generate some code. If you give me a like if I get a wrong answer, that for me is troubled. Some to use that I generate the wrong codes, and then it's very, very difficult to debug
[37:27]
Luca Palmieri: It's like. Why did that get generated? That that's problem. So rest of children as the pro of being correct. But you of the fact of using part of the same. You know Pipeline of the compiler is going to, you know, to the compilation.
Luca Palmieri: So that was one of the reasons why I opted for the stuff chasing rather than you know, I would have my way through on Brussels.
Andrei Listochkin: Yeah. Also documentation, we're probably a less documented than
Luca Palmieri: Yes.
Andrei Listochkin: Yeah. So
Andrei Listochkin: right. any ways to improve the communication for Macros in general
Andrei Listochkin: in both way.
Andrei Listochkin: Yeah, I don't know, like Macro. Any macro in its core is a function that takes a sequence of tokens and produces a new sequence of tokens like you said
Andrei Listochkin: So you essentially documenting this function behavior, and then it's up to you, Mark down, is a very
[38:31]
Andrei Listochkin: extensive format. You can put stuff in.
Andrei Listochkin: Yeah. So the issue with like markers in, you know, generally speaking.
Luca Palmieri: and this is the way I conceptualize them is, you know, a pro come up with a meaning compiler. and the proc marker is defining that not between the so
Luca Palmieri: they may look like rust, but it's not necessarily going to look like press. So if you look, for example, as some of the from time frameworks that you can find around like you and see, come, or and a few others.
Luca Palmieri: They implement the room version of Jsx. So you know, javascript embedded into us. That's a of mark that doesn't look across the door. So a way to, you know, improve documentation as in like providing tools to Macro authors, they make it so that the documentation that they get is
Luca Palmieri: better out of the box.
Luca Palmieri: in my opinion, relies on providing additional structure to that Macro. So, instead of, you know, looking at the Macro as a way to say, talking in talking out and no introspections.
[39:33]
Luca Palmieri: If you say okay, this Macro expects an input destruction in a certain way, and then.
Luca Palmieri: by putting this structure in, I can also generate some documentation, because I know that this is going to imply certain parsing behavior, then that is the way to provide by the docs. But fundamentally this is true for any kind of project. The more structure I know
Luca Palmieri: that your input or processing respects. The more I can do for you. the more I'm structured is the interface, the more freedom you have as an implementer the less I can assume about what you you' about to implement. And so you know, talking about it's the most unstructured possible interface. It's like arbitrary via. Your is possible in the
Luca Palmieri: while. Micro rules, for example, like, Why, there, for example, so much better in terms of
Luca Palmieri: photo completion in the Id, as an example, is that they're much more subject like, you know, they can do something. You can catch the results as long as the input is the same, because they're going to be deterministic.
Luca Palmieri: You know all these assumptions allow tools to be on top of them to make assumptions that allow them to support better. And so I wonder if perhaps this is a question which I think was raised in the past? If we should have moved people across markers, interfaces at different levels of obstructions
[40:48]
Luca Palmieri: that when you do something that is more structured allows you to get better talks, and by the road to completion on with the box, then the super powerful interface, which is the current default. But then you don't need to it into you, and this goes beyond box. This is about at a rambling recovery and a bunch of other stuff like everybody on to the on parsing, and
Luca Palmieri: seem now be part of the standard toolkit and so on and so forth.
Andrei Listochkin: Yeah. Yeah, Micro. He's a micro story in general like it's it's there, but it's not. And it's not a.
Luca Palmieri: I would say it's not a Pre. We the support levels not premium compared to the rest of the rascal. It's an Mvp. Which you can. You can do a lot with, but it's not, perhaps, in the United States.
Andrei Listochkin: Yeah. I'd probably better position to say, to talk about like a prop micro work in. We. We try to isolate this part of Ross from the rest of your code base. So everything related to Macros is handled by a separate sub process.
[41:53]
which is also part of the reasons why it's very hard to do rational as a support in some web ids or or or something. Because in web by ease you usually compile R to the Web Assembly, and you run it as this.
Andrei Listochkin: however, because everything related to Macresses runs in a separate process. You also have to compile that, and then you have to on your website. You have to somehow. Come, connect those 2 by possibly modules together, and
Andrei Listochkin: not everybody has a good, a good story supporting that kind of behavior.
Andrei Listochkin: And why we do it this way. Because, Proc macros break more often than Ross in general, like because internal representation for for tokens, and everything can break, or more often. So. What happens sometimes is that you wrote Macro, which is so complicated that
Andrei Listochkin: some stuff around it starts breaking on the Id side on language server side, and instead of like your macro killing the whole rest of the process, it only kills a small sub process which is instantly restarted.
[43:02]
Andrei Listochkin: So that's the story there.
Andrei Listochkin: all right. So people are excited about your framework.
Andrei Listochkin: Let's see store the layouts of struts. Oh, this is an interesting question. Can you get like a a F of presentation? Can Ross do help with ffi understanding how like certain fields, layouts, layouts are done in this in a instruct, etc.
Luca Palmieri: Oh, that's a nice question. Some life, you know that answering so the way I would go about this in this, you know building people, stuff types which is here.
Andrei Listochkin: So here.
Luca Palmieri: and then, you know, this is an item which is what I was showing you in the talk. And then the other I am inside is an IP min them, which then is kind of switch over to different things. So if we are asking, for example about layout. I would go into this, which is a struct
Luca Palmieri: that kind then contain different types of strikes, and this doesn't seem to have any information about the out. So all this looks very boring.
[44:12]
Andrei Listochkin: Well, like representation is usually done using rapper at, like, you know. R. See? Like, what is it? Transparent? It's not like, you see, transparent and cystic call, etc. I'm just i'm just being on the track level. Yeah, on the it, If it's an attribute, it could be not on an item, but some, maybe
Luca Palmieri: item has some links. Actually, you're right. So yeah, there's this app thing which is like attributes. So it's probably here. So, for example, this why, you would look for something like in line.
Andrei Listochkin: Yeah. So you would search for this.
Andrei Listochkin: Yeah, Does it? Does it provide you the string itself, or is it a to a an Id that you can go in the Json?
Luca Palmieri: No, I think it's a string itself. So the thing got to be. It's got, you know, special handled. So every attribute which I think is basically every sequence of you know, in closing it's an entry into this factor.
[45:16]
Luca Palmieri: and then inside there, you gotta pass it out yourself. So you
Luca Palmieri: we manual.
Andrei Listochkin: Yeah, what possible?
Andrei Listochkin: Yeah.
Andrei Listochkin: Bogdan mentioned another language called normally, which I remember being a thing that actually does multi-level macro expansion. And for different levels you get different different mechanism which is cool. I know Zig is currently like experimenting a lot with the compile time, execution.
Andrei Listochkin: and trying to site, step the whole thing by giving you whole compiler instead of like sub compiler for micros.
Andrei Listochkin: which is also interesting. We'll see how it goes. And finally a few questions like, is the new book coming?
Luca Palmieri: Oh, there's no new book in the making at this point in time, and I can expand on that like Fundamentally, I write books about stuff that I know Well, you know, to know a subject. Well, you've got to spend time doing it.
[46:21]
Luca Palmieri: The synthesis of a few years teaching back and development to people in rust. And then, you know, collecting all that material as one book. the book that I have in mind. But I haven't started fighting, and i'm not going to start writing, probably in the next 6 months
Luca Palmieri: is about running production workloads, so advanced patterns, trouble shooting mechanisms way to do things. Perhaps a bunch of concurrency. But I think it's pretty much sure to. Probably at this stage. I wanna you know, work on some of those things a bit more. See how they go out.
Luca Palmieri: do a bunch of to. So a bunch of blog posts. And then once I have enough detail that might be collected again
before, or perhaps not someone else.
Andrei Listochkin: Yeah.
Luca Palmieri: And people ask way where you got all this pictures of cute crabs. It's here so it's attribution. If you look for what's the design, there you can find all the pictures they're created commons license, so you can use them to as long as you put the order.
[47:21]
Andrei Listochkin: Yeah. right.
And
Andrei Listochkin: I really on a personal mode I read, really liking everything you write about just gives another perspective into like, how can we make rust tooling, which is not generally rustling, but very specific to specific domain. I think there is a lot of potential in that area.
and you are one of the P. And thank you for doing that even if the framework itself is not popular.
Andrei Listochkin: the what you doing, describing everything it's amazing, and I think every other framework would be jealous of having something like this that you that you try to build. And i'm looking forward. It's probably going to be like the best framework to even if it's fast. It's going to be the best framework period. If it's
Andrei Listochkin: a bit slower, it's gonna be the best frame of to learn rust, and probably to run production as well, because Ross is fast enough.
[48:22]
Luca Palmieri: It's going to be fast on.
Luca Palmieri: I haven't run benchmark. I will argue that it's going to be faster, but that until it's through. I think it should be easy.
Andrei Listochkin: Yeah, let's see. Give me 6 months. We we not really like in a hurry here.
Luca Palmieri: Oh, yeah, I want to see it done it. It's so difficult to do a project for a long time, and that people can't try. Then you can't explain it to them, because if you use it to a bunch of sub clicks. But if you just think about it, it doesn't so I don't want to get it to stay, but people can use it. So working in it. Part.
Andrei Listochkin: Yeah, that's great. That's great.
Andrei Listochkin: All right. As long as we don't have any questions in chat or in Q. A. I think we are down here.
Andrei Listochkin: Nice My pleasure. Thank you. Thank you so much for coming over it's a very, very interesting talk my very talk of the day. Thank you so much.
Luca Palmieri: Thanks a lot.
[49:23]
Andrei Listochkin: All right.

=== ROW 278 | f015640 | https://youtube.com/watch?v=cwFFcl9VeAs | 2024-09-20 | youtube ===
[00:00]
Yeah, correct.
Hello! Oh, thank you very much. Thank you. Alright. So we're gonna start.
I'm your host for the for this talk. My name is Andre.
I'm really stoic, and I listened for many, many years, and I was the regional back in a day organized of you.
Be rusty pain, and right now our work at fairer systems, a company that also focuses on rust a lot, and in particular, we also interested in grass for automative industry.
Yeah.
We are building a version of qualified compiler called Ferro scene, which we target for automatic industry, and in a I don't work on pricing.
I work on rust analyzer, among other things, and mostly doing rough trainings, and also some custom customer projects.
But we are big believers in rust and big believers in rust, in safety.
Critical applications, like in automotive. So today, we have 2 incredible people with us, Andre. And and so he Serie, is a principal C plus plus engineer at the company.
[01:12]
Intelia, and he's been doing c plus plus for 15 years and more, which is super impressive.
To be honest, and he is also interested in Rust.
Like many many programmers out there, and he's he's working very hard to make C, plus safer.
And also to use rust to improve safety of critical systems even more, and along with we have Andrei, Henri Sherba, who's an A.
C plus plus architect at Intel is with 10 years of experience, but importantly, 5 of those 10 years are related to autoimmune industry, which is super cool Henri has been working really really hard to make our cars more safe better to drive more secure and also easier to just use and more
comfortable, which is super admirable, because cars are scary.
[02:12]
They're big. They're made of iron, and they can kill people, but they also do a lot of amazing things like moving stuff around.
So anyway, they will talk to us about use of rust in our automatic industry.
In particular, in which in itself is a very, very big consumption of companies.
I think. Bmw. Toyota, Mercedes.
I don't remember other club brands, but there are like 300 plus companies that participate in this big initiative, and together they're building set of programming standards, guidelines, etc., etc., about how so certain things in our cars.
Software wise has to work. So it's a very important work that they do, and they'll talk more about it.
So the stage is yours.
[03:12]
Great. Thank you. Hi! All happy to see you on Ukrainian rascal Conference today.
We're gonna discuss benefits of rust usage in optimo. Can you bring next slide?
Yeah. Great aust enable, Doctor, sar, we will discuss benefits of rust usage in of the most future opportunities which automotive domain can bring to Russia's developers and great perspectives for us to became part of the motive in nearest future.
Your speakers, me and reserve said he not so, and also we should have special guest on Q. And a session.
Chris Patty, 200.
Let's start from overview of of the star and of the market domain itself.
Automotive is really huge. There are a lot of different directions of development you can see here, many of them.
[04:18]
But of course not all of them, because automotive is much more bigger.
On this diagram you can see how fast after the motive is growing, especially last year, so you can see how fast number of uses is growing inside of the car.
One note that Ecu is electric control unit. And basically it's functional note inside of the car.
So we can make straight line between number of Vc use and the number of functionality inside of the car.
This grow is based on grow of features which we have inside those a car, you can see that the last 10 years we got a lot of new trans and directions inside of automotive like electric cars connected cars autonomous driving systems, and especially very important is software-defined
vehicle concept which is basically game changer on the market.
[05:21]
Because now we are looking at current, not like on the vehicle which can bring us from point A to Point B.
Now we are looking at car like on big smartphone with next slide.
Please.
If we are talking about optimality, no chance to not talk about that are a bit.
So after Star is very big concerns inside of automotive, which was founded 20 years ago in 203, and today it has more than 350 partners and intelligence.
By the way, also part of of the module consortium.
Next slide, please.
Currently automotive has 2 platforms on the left side.
You can see out to start.
It is well known technology and the market. It is based on C, and has monolithic architecture.
After Sarclassic was optimized it for low latency operations and high A/C levels.
[06:21]
A still, its functional safety level we'll talk about it a bit later, and on the right side you can see after Sarah, do you? Platform?
Its new platform. It was not created to substanceitute classic one.
It's a created to be an addition to classic platform and meet new challenges which we have enough to motive.
What to Sarah? Do you, already based on 14, has said we said oriented architecture, and optimize it for flexibility and high performance operation.
Next slide for our presentation. Important to talk a bit more about the communication stack in optus are, adopt you?
Since we have service oriented architectures that we, using proxy, skeletton pattern for communication between different services in general, you need to make service interface definition using Rxml format, its special xml like format for updates are and the from this service interface definition we
[07:24]
will generate proxy, skeleton interfaces, and need over transport layer.
Using all of it we can establish communication between different services.
Next slide, please, as I promise we will talk also about A/C levels and functional safety.
So I so 202, 6, 2 is functional safety standard in optimum.
And it is very important standard, for of the motive, because of the multimedia really cares a lot about safety inside of this standard there were defined for A/C levels Acl, as you can see, it's optimal safety integrity level.
And we have 4 levels from lowest A to highest D, we can view an examples like both real lights, failure is still a because it' can lead to some harm.
But maybe to not be King insurance. An on opposite side.
So steering is Sld because it any failure here can lead us to very big insurance.
[08:27]
Next slide also would like to talk more about projects of Russ integration in Afghanistan.
Here you can see a timeline of main milestones of rust integration in Optimocho in middle of 2019 we got first articles about roasting of the Moto, and in September 2020, we already go to very good presentation by Fer all systems.
About the benefits of rust usage for functional safety development, and after market also.
In February 2021, Ferracine compiler was announced it, and it is very important, for of the motive, because this compiler should be compliant with Iso 2, 6, 2, 6, 2, march 2022, 2 working groups were created Warren
was created in Sayye. It's society of Automotive Engineers, also very big organization inside of automotive.
And another one was created in Afghanistan, and me and Sergei and Christophetic.
[09:34]
We are part of this working group in after so Christophe's lead of this in October 2022 Romanian startupoxy toys raised it funds more than 1 million entities important for us, because this is is written in rust and recently oxidized joined after star
as well. So we have chance that this will be use.
It in automotive, in the future, and from a current activities which we see is that some are project is under development.
It's a rust implementation of some IP protocol.
It's important because some IP is use it for communication in of the Sarah W.
And also recently, we got full support of unix neutrino Standard Library, which is a very, very popular operating system.
In October with you. Next slide, please. On this slide you can see several more projects with Rustin of the motive, just to show you that there are much more projects with rust and of tomorrow.
[10:38]
But we cannot go through all of them because of time limits of this presentation.
Next slide, please, from all of it we can see several major trends.
One is that c plus plus does not hold monopoly in optimality world anymore.
And at the same time we see that the rust is looking for new areas, new domains for expansion and automotive is very good candidate for it, and also we see that Carmakers and tier one suppliers are already preparing ground for applian roasting of the motor
next slide, please. On this face. I would like to pass the stage to my colleague, Sergei.
Please go on. Second.
Hello, Ed, so now give you a brief overview of 2 intelligence projects related to rust and automotive to my.
And here's the first one. So this is the project about rusty programming language in corporation to their adaptive SDK, this, this has started about a year ago, and still being developed by several members of it is our working group safety and intelligence is one of active contributors.
[11:49]
There the main goal is adding rust. Api.
On top of the existing Api. On this site you can see the architecture diagram of the project.
At the bottom level. There is the posix compatible operating system, on top of which there is depth to the platform, consisting of multiple services with standardized Api, for instance, look for login or bird for data persistence, etc.
There is a special called Com, or Communication.
It's not used directly, but rather by skeptons and proxies.
The Blue Code generated from this service definitions you before.
This is the base for matches. Our applications, like the one at the left, and there goes our integration.
[12:51]
So we have different wrapper C in and rust Api on top of it, and this Api helps build in native rust with our application.
Now this Api is in development. It's still not complete.
This is the communication diagram. You may notice some additional layers were added for us.
Applications to communicate with each other, and other applications.
The main idea is communication, transparency.
All the applications can talk to us about applications the same way as they talk to applications.
Now we'll go through the key points of the implementation, so we'll just talk about 3 of them.
But there are many more. So first, we are using because SDK has a synchronous Api based on futures.
[13:55]
So we are assembling it, and the runtime we're using now is small.
But there are plans to replace it with a runtime.
It was other, I think, current times. The second big thing is co-generation, which consists of 3 parts c plus plus bindings.
Generation by the existing tool. Trust bindings generation from service definitions, and this mind is packing to rust library.
And.
See bindings do that from the generated Trust code, with the binding Bungee, and so that the up code could be called back from the layer.
And finally, we are compiling the project to different platforms, supported by the SDK, which creates some challenges for us, because the linkers are different from the standard one which is Ld.
[14:59]
For for us. Now here's a small example of the main functions of trust, or to their applications resp., basically, it's the same application.
And here you may notice that the rest code is much more concise, and is using some Asin calls.
There, so now I will give you a brief example of how the code generations going on.
So there is another service. Definition. It's basically an Xml document.
Here you can see the definition of a method called adjust with 2 inputs and with one input and 2 output parameters.
And from this definition our SDK. Would generate code and our trust integration in turn would generate trust, proxy, or the see wrapper of this method calling it synchronously and at the bottom there's an example of how this could be called from rust application looks much simpler than
[16:13]
the rest, because all the complexity is hidden inside the integration layer.
We're working. Next chapter is about practical example of an application based on this rust integration concept that we have just seen.
So Intel has recently initiated an internal concept project of integration.
It's a wheeled robot capable of autonomous parking with software written in rust and running on what is our adaptive demonstrator platform, which is the reference platform we're working with?
And the goal is to gain some experience in real automotive rust projects and to extend the company's portfolio.
Now I'll briefly explain the main algorithm.
So the robot is driving past some wall with parking slots and scanning it with a side attached ultrasonic sensor.
[17:22]
Once the big enough slot is found performance, the power parking manure occupying the the slot and the calculation is based on free space polyline estimation for the parking lot.
Also the autonomous driving is supported by odormity, which is the estimated weak opposition based on counting will revolutions.
So this is how the menu is. Looks like.
So now the project hardware set up just like this.
The project is controlled by by raspberry Pi, connected to the host.
Computer with Wifi, and there is to their adaptive platform so installed on it, the robot.
We also have not sonic distance, sensor motor driver, controlling motors and speed encoders.
[18:27]
And now here's the software design of the project. Okay, and hardware abstraction there, or over sensors.
Currently, it's just one sensor. Ultimately, distance sensor and it's linked to data processing algorithm, where which is not yet implemented.
It's supposed to preprocess all the data, the communication with the host is based on our com, which is communication subsidies.
All of these aspects into a rust application on the this are adaptive platform as a service, and also there is a Gui client application which visualizes the free space data, and the week.
And now I'll show you a brief demo. How it's looks like at the moment.
[19:27]
So, frankly. It's rather primitive. There's no robot platform.
Available, yet so forward moment is in software, we're using a box that shows as an obstacle and moving it to and from the sensor to generate some free space data.
And you can see clusters of dots which represent the free space polyline.
And there's a lot of noise now, and but it will be ruled out once we post-processing.
So now, what are our further plans? The rust integration project we are going to replace the com stack with the rests on wire protocols, implementations like summer, for example.
And this is done to reduce the complexity of code, which is quite complex.
[20:30]
Now, because of different layers, and Iffy and so on.
Also, we are going to integrate the project with adaptive demonstrator platform.
And next thing is to extend the rust integration to classic platform, and it should bring the some great benefits, because rust has built-in support for embedded development like terrible no, and we, with no Sd configuration.
And top of that there is a great, easing framework called Embassy, and that's for our robot project.
Next steps would be adding the data we processing, replacing the movement, simulation with the real robot and implementing all the vehicle packing algorithm.
[21:30]
So what conclusions would we draw from this first of all?
There's active trend towards rusty cooperation into automotive rust provides memory and safety.
And thread safety out of the box, which is of great importance to automate world, and is one of the technologies that could enable rust for many car companies in the world.
Okay. Here's the A collection of links which could be of your interest, and a separate slide is about links that were that are about the time of that, we have shown before.
Thank you.
[22:31]
Now, good, talk about questions. Yeah.
Alright. Thank you so much, both of you. First of all, we have a poll right about the future of us.
Development in automotive right. You can vote. What do you think?
On, on, on this, on this, and we we can talk some more.
Andre is being answering questions that be. People will post, in which was, Oh, almost no, honestly sounded feel, because we're gonna ask those questions and answer them again because we want them to be part of the video.
Anyway. So let's see, and we can go in any order right?
So people asking about, like other applications of rust not only cars, but like food, medical supplies, delivery robots, things like that right?
[23:33]
And.
Yeah, yeah, basically, I'm the sure about the other domains.
Because today we were talking more about rust, and after Sarah, and after.
Sorry it's purely aftermarket technology. So it is used it only enough to what is not to use it in any other domain.
So for me, it's hard to answer about any other domains which also use safety, critical functionality.
Yeah, I could tell from our side, like from side we when we were discussing about like use of rust in this safety, critical scenarios sounds like different industries have different set of standards.
Automotive industry was relatively easy to start, because, though the standards are very, very hard to follow, but all standards are hard to follow.
Right for car for car market. In particular, there is this one big group, one big industry association that that allows once we pause, those standards and bus, we integrate with this stack will be able to enable rust usage across wide wide set of industry right and then moving
[24:56]
from that to other domains, like aerospace of industry. Right?
And then moving from that to other domains like aerospace, for example, is much easier after you're done with cars.
If you start with aerospace, then it's much, much, much more difficult.
And meanwhile people could already benefit from rust usage in that industry.
So, car, relatively easy to start, relatively easy to get things standardized, and that was the goal.
Right, right. The next one is so is mostly C and C, plus plus.
So what's the point of using rust?
Said he, they want to answer this question. I guess this one. But there, see, it's to you.
Of course. So the main goal is to make the development safer because there are multiple studies that show that also there are different tools like static analyzers, different compilers, certified compilers.
[26:06]
There are still a lot of human factor when working with Cn.
Yeah, where there is no guarantee that you can do something wrong and compiler is not obliged to control this.
So, in rust. It's back into the language.
So I have board checker and exceptional design of the language which enables us to write safe application out of the box, and it it's working for a big amount of applications which are functional safety creativity that means that they are somehow related to a
hazard exposures means that they could. The failure in them bring some harm to people in the current.
[27:12]
Yeah, so it's very important for them to be set to be reliable and safe.
Make it easier to write such applications. Also, it's more modern.
This c plus plus and doesn't bring a lot of baggage of backward compatibility.
So!
Yup, it's has a lot of benefits apart from memory, safety.
So a lot of components are trying to or are going to use it.
But there are some things that currently are not yet available, like, for example, integration that we are working on, and so that things are still in some transition stage.
[28:14]
I can bring, you know, one example. It's so pretty popular in optimization, example will not go into the details.
But anyway, I don't know many then about years. So about that there was a case in Toyota when there was a bug in memory management, and they just at some point those code inside of the car go and corrupt a part of memory, not it was a bed control of step and they just corrupt part
of memory in other regions, and car start accelerate. And that's all.
And that basically this car start accelerating. A driver cannot do anything because it was because of this buck accelerating.
And this car was fall into the wall and killed 3 people inside of this car.
And basically it was even a luck that no one of pedestrians was not there yeah, so was there could be even more injuries.
[29:19]
And that one case, how bad memory management can lead us to very big harm and to enrust it.
It, this much harder to make such kind of mistakes in C, plus.
Plus. We are applying a lot of static analysis to avoid this cases.
But anyway, you need to think about all Mr. You need to cover by this static analysis and the like said told, it's human factor.
You just cannot cover all and miss one small point. Do not cover it by static analysis.
People also can miss something, and you will correct memory, and it will make not correct functionality.
And especially now we are in front of a autonomous driving.
Yeah. And it's even more more significant thing.
Because you let it go to the car. So Driver, not even controlling so much like it was a previously, and there is much more software, and it is much more complicated to control of the software. And so on.
[30:38]
That it's a reasons why we are looking for more safe and to reliable solutions for safety.
Critical functionality in the account.
Yeah, there were other stories like this with other manufacturers.
We shouldn't single out just one of them. And thankfully, these stories are rare and far between and over time, with the adoption of rust they should be even less prominent than they were than they are now.
Alright. People ask like, are there any production cars right now that run some rust?
Nope, not yet so.
Yeah. So the short answer is not yet.
Oh, Rob, I would say, probably probably because not all software requires such a.
Yeah, you can. Okay.
Yeah, that was I was for trying to get to right your entertainment system.
Think that, for example, a car can show you the current weather, and it might be using curl to get to make all leap coral to make the request for that, and leap coral dependent on how you build and compile comes with Ross back and forth depending on how you build and compile comes with Ross beck and for some for some parts of
[31:51]
Agb stack for Tls and for the other things.
So, and a lot of projects that currently run on top of Linux like for some auxiliary stuff like, I don't know sound system, or whatever they are.
Now start to add modules written in rust, so you might have a situation where one of the few 1 million lines of code that every car has currently right.
One of them will be, or will be, running rust.
But inside the what's this called ecu?
Also, it depends. So if it's some Hmi application, it's human.
The control unit right now. There are no.
Human machine interface.
Yeah, human control interface. And so zoom human machine interface.
So it's not covered even by a so it can use rust.
[32:53]
Also they are bringing enjoy it outer and cotton. There.
Yup!
So they are also not part of this. So you can see that not only rust is trying to have some share there.
And yeah, this area that can already be some rough applications I can tell about.
Bmw. There they were using some small system, parts that were written Rust.
But it's not. It's more like system level software.
And it's not covered by A/C levels. Oh, there are already some attempts to use rust, but it's going to be better.
Cool, cool. So we have a few more questions like people asking are operating systems like arrows.
Which is a robotic. OS or errors, too, are using.
[33:56]
And Andre mentioned that auto Star is already a platform.
You build stuff on top of it. So.
Oh, I can extend it a bit. So basically, it is possible to use both of them inside of the car.
I don't, didn't hear about such examples, but it is possible.
So you can deploy up to Star a classic on one I see you after star adaptive on another cu, and, for example, the Rawson Cu.
If you want today, if it makes sense. But our projects, which we were talking about today, they are about rust integration, integration into the star.
And if you use after sorry, you cannot use anything else.
I can add about Ross. So I've worked with Ross one of previous projects, and they are mostly used to do some.
So they are not used in real production.
They are used to develop some outreach like, and then they are written in different platforms that are more native to a certain carmaker.
[35:12]
So that's the thing that I know. But maybe there are cases when it's used in real car.
But I doubt I doubt it.
Yeah, probably. Yes, because, as we told the automotive cares a lot about safety.
And we have a lot of hmm. Now, things which we need to do to prove the safety of this technology and for us, it's not compliant with automotive safety standards.
And of course it will be hard to release this car on needed savvy level.
So maybe for some not safety critical. You can use it. But the but the still it will be hard to use for any safety.
Critical things.
Yeah, we have quite a few more questions. Actually. So do, do you have time to stay around for longer?
Yeah, yeah, have a bit of time.
Oh, that's cool, that's cool. So people ask like, while you were integrating with rust how you found any bugs in the underlying CC.
[36:13]
Plus layer.
Well!
Nope!
Yeah, I was wondering, like, so.
Yeah, well, yeah. The question was about the applications, but we are not working with real applications.
Yup!
We are working with the standard, and oh, sorry! So ideas that we are working with this adaptive demonstrator platform, which is the reference.
It's not used in any car it's used to build other platforms which are certified, and they are closed, sourced.
And we are using so called sample applications, which are demonstrating the abilityilities of this.
System. Yes, there are some box there, but I wouldn't say it's this software is highly covered by tests or something.
[37:25]
Yeah. Oh, all right. Oh, okay, Mark, this is answer, yeah.
Let's skip this. Do you see?
The moment Sam Ross applications in the standard software that big automatic costs company like Tell you the fax logging group, Jm.
Tesla, etc., like not in the control unit, but in the entertainment system.
Another parts. There's definitely at this point, there's definitely some rustle in the already, because they do this over the air updates right?
And a lot of these cars for entertainment systems.
They are running. Android and Android has rust inside, so.
Yeah.
Have you measured the amount of unsafe code you had to? You had to write.
Do you use any unsafe blocks to talk to see?
[38:26]
Of course.
I presume? Yes, but was that a big, big?
Was it a big part of work? Was it a relatively small part of work?
I would say it's the biggest part, because the because of the and I think, rust that we are trying to implement there there's a lot of things that we need to to.
And it's not like Api.
It's post pair with Ops. So we need to maintain some binary.
Theatibility.
There is a lot of bugs there, I guess when we're talking about safety, safety, safety of the application written last in session manner.
So the main a source of box would be in this integration.
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah. Yeah. I was wondering how you do that. Right?
Do you use? Did you write your bondings using like C by engine manually? Did you use some?
[39:30]
Yeah. Hmm.
Cxx dot ras, or any other like builder, to make cross and see talk to each other like.
Okay, I, I can cover that. Yeah. We were thinking of using Cxx.
But there's a lot of complications when using it, because part of the code is generated.
So it's not possible to include it at the time when it's and the R code is written.
So it's all generated.
I see bindings for a plus code, because it's 2 way communication.
And basically objects are passing Thef file layer to and from.
Yup!
So, for example, there is an ascent call, and you need to start it in rust, and then carried on in the, and then return the result in the rust.
[40:35]
So it's rather complicated. Yeah, we have already fixed some box there.
Yeah, related to life. Times, yeah. Love them are also very complicated.
And also we're trying not to use nightly.
Because we're not using it. Some things are not just possible.
So we are also thinking of using the of implementing the synchronous Api on top of our just simplify things.
Part of the standard. Yeah.
Because, yeah, we are waiting for is in trades to be part of yeah, yes, stay stable rust, because without them it's yeah.
It's Nope so good. But, as I said, it's still in progress, and and some things are changing.
So kind of state. It's not how it would look like in year.
[41:35]
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah, I want to interrupt us, because I want to mention to participants that the next room is opened.
So if you want to go, listen to the next talk, you can close this window, go back to the go back to the lobby, to the website to pick the next room and join there.
But I presume those that stay with us are still interested in this topic, more so.
Let's continue discussing it here. So this is, we do have a single track conference, but it works like a if you're here, then that means you are in a corridor, and someone is already started.
The next door. So anyway, I wanted like in it, about a synchronous, I can tell you.
That like, it's a big kind of war. I'm not really participating actively in a sync working group.
But I'm one of the people who are like reviewing.
[42:36]
It's work all the time at first, and like it turns out making a syncretase is like several layers of complexity, and I was expecting them in Q. One.
This year, based on what I saw, that in a progress in the middle of last year, right now, it doesn't seem like they will come until Q.
3 or q. 4. So. And if they come they will probably come.
And so some limit state, and that makes a sync work a bit complicated because you have to target specific runtime on one side and also right in individual futures.
On the other side, I assume, since you were using small, you had to implement small futures, smallerware futures for for offers are right for our account. Right?
Yes. Oh, there's a lot of code. I can't quite remember this.
[43:39]
Yeah.
Yeah, we will not go there. We will not.
Go into the into details, and just a very, very cool to see that not only you did just basic integration.
You also decided to tackle on the sink question, which is a very, very complicated subjects on the cell, on self.
Right? So people, like a more general question, right? We talked about like rust coming up to cars, etc., like there is a other side of the coin right to for us software to appear in the car.
Someone has to write this software. And do you feel like there's gonna be a big uptake in rust projects of companies that participate in automotive industry at this point.
So basically I can take it for now, you know, we see some small activities about it that we also attend.
[44:44]
Yeah.
Tell us where a're looking for some Ross developers, and you know it's not easy to find to be honest, because for of the module customers want to have automotive experience, and there is no chicken egg a question what to start first can the date should know
rust and top. Tomorrow. But there are no projects already with rust and optimum.
Not much of them, but I know that rust is, use it actively on wolver, for example, they have projects.
I know that the Bmw. Had some projects I heard about projects in related, so a lot of companies are exploring projects with rust, and when when we will prove from our sides that it can be used it for others are adoptive for example, when a some companies will finish those projects which may be not announced now but the in
[45:44]
progress, and show also proves that it is, for can rust with after with after.
Well, then, we'll it probably has this pump.
Of course I don't know how long it will be, because, you know, it can be sens more like hype.
But anyway, that we will. I expect this pump. Yeah, that we will have it at some point. And I's that this point is pretty close.
Yeah, I would add that I like not the project. Do not have to start in the car at the car manufacturers side only, like companies like internal us are doing a doing some experimentation companies like also another software.
Company is doing is doing a big push, and on that side, on their side the story goes like similarly, like Andrea, we, they have a bunch of people who can, who worked at automotive industry on software side.
[46:45]
And now they have teach them to teach them rust, or switch them to rust, but also some people who know rust might come in and join later, because in this is something we are observed in many industries and the industry starts moving from c plus plus to rust and move developers from c plus plus to rust and
then they realize that they need pure rust, experience, and only then they will add people who are more like Rust's have general Russ knowledge, but not the domain.
Knowledge. The main knowledge usually comes first in this. In this industries and car industry is one of them.
All right. Okay. This was answered.
This was answered. Let's see what we have. Oh, that's an interesting question.
[47:46]
If we have 2 systems that have different safety level requirements does it mean that they do not share memory?
They have their own like memory. How do separately?
Yeah, I think so. It's not possible. Well, at the higher requirements.
So it will violate sod. They share memory, I guess.
Yeah, so basically, general approach is that lowest Heyl level is your A/C level?
If you want to put components, for example, aclb, and then you will put component with issue a at the same hardware and we'll communicate with it.
You can put it on the same hardware and checks that it will not corrupt memory.
[48:51]
It's possible also is not the mandatory, that they will not put it, but it's hard, and in most cases it's components are just split it to different hardware.
And it really reach, reduce amount of work. It's a much more easier just to split them to different hardware.
Yeah. Alright, so people asked general questions about others are like, is it only about autonomous development driving?
Or there are some other features that it covers.
Currently, what would that other side do?
It's totally not about of the normal driving, you know of the start, especially.
After. It's very old. Well known technology on the market and main main, for it is to work with embedded, embedded features inside the of the.
[49:54]
So you can a work with some stabilization systems, and so on, which are a.
This is, systems are on the market from early to oh, from the beginning of current century.
Let's call it like that. Yeah. So autonomous driving is mutual challenge.
And the basically, it's hard to update, even autonomous driving system own of the because it's optimize it for this embedded syncs and low latency operations.
And mostly for after autonomous driving, and not only for over the air updates for connected cars, technologies, and so on, was created after adoptive.
And now we are working with it. We'll see how good it will match.
This challenges. So yeah. But in general, after star, it's a for embedded software of the car.
[50:55]
It's not about an autonomous driving, and the autonomous driving.
It's something pretty much new which we are working with.
Yup, and when we talk about autonomous driving, it doesn't mean like full scale, like you sit in a car like a passenger right?
A lot of subsystems, of autonomous driving can be applied in some smaller cases, just making sure car doesn't like bump into other cars.
So parking assist technology, things like that. Right? So a lot of these new things, well, new, we don't have to wait for the full self-driving cars for it to be usable.
So a lot of this might put Tickle down into office are not outside.
So bought software built on top of it. Speaking, yeah.
Yeah. By the way, can do one comment here. Unfortunately, I have to cut out the this slide about level.
[52:00]
Uhhuh.
Of of the autonomous driving because of time limits.
But I had it so. If people are interested, say, Can Google this call it the say, yeah, levels of the normal driving?
And we have 5 levels. Let's go even 6, because we start from 0.
Yeah.
No optimization. And now we are about on the sort level, starting certain level of this autonomous driving scale, and there would be more correct even to not call after normal strikes and call highly automated driving because we are not talking about autonomous driving now, we are talking about highly automated driving and even here we are not
in very much state so. Oh!
Yup yup, so you used a reference reference platform for to do a technology demonstrator.
Do you think that part of this, or part of the SDK in general will be available for us developers in future for everybody who wants to do something with us?
[53:14]
I cannot predict the future. So there are plans to include it.
To the this demonstrator platform. Currently, it's a site project it's not included.
Then we are going to include it to the standard, or at least not include included to the demonstrator, and could be like, not alternative.
Api so there's kind of some bureaucracy, so they are not willing to accept trust as a full software stack language.
That means that you don't want to write the whole stack in rust.
But yeah, there is some pressure from some members of the consortium, but the management is not currently open to this.
[54:20]
So most probably it will be like wrapper. Api over this standard Api, and it will be available.
Well, the whole demonstrator platform is not open source.
Unfortunately, it's also a big question that we're has been discussed for quite a long time.
Yup!
There are some licensing issues which it doesn't, which don't allow it to be open.
And yeah, there are legal matters. And so, but for the members of the consortium it would be available.
In the year's future. Maybe next year.
It's my prediction, I think, for sure.
Yeah, that's cool. We we like on our side.
I think, for seeing compiler should be somewhat available also.
[55:21]
Not open source, but I don't know to to the 2 individual partners.
First, and it will also be available only like the plan, I think, was to get it done last year.
But some certification takes a long time, so maybe this year we will have something people ask like, if you use unsafe code right?
What's the point of using rust, then? That's a general question not related to cars.
Oh, and safe code doesn't meet. It is key. This is broken, totally missed, that you need to take it with a greater care than other parts.
Of code.
You cannot write.
Currently without unsafe code. So our AIM is to do all the programming and unsafe inside the wrapper level and show only save Api, which don't.
[56:27]
Yeah.
And.
Make you use this unsafe parts. Well, the only way to make it not use unsafe is to write it from the bottom in rust, which is not possible.
Well, at least 100% possible. Maybe it could be somewhat reduced.
I mentioned that we are trying to, or we are planning to replace some parts like communication stack to rust implementation, and after we do it we'll remove a lot of unsafe code.
Already!
And one comment from functional safety perspective basically Esther, he told the unsafe.
It's not doesn't mean that it is broken code.
That user just need to make more care about it. And the if we will put this unsafe parts in the wrapper, which maybe even will be generated by scripts and develop a application developers will not have to do it.
[57:33]
Then we can do from functional safety, perspective justification. You can just write your justification as developer of this course, that yes, you have.
Check it, and do you make sure that it is safe and no problem with the functional safety on some level?
Yeah, of course, we have a A/C levels, and that that can work it.
This approach is working on production projects. It's not not the problem.
It's not common approach, but anyway, sometimes you have some library which is not certified for need. A digital level.
But you no check test. Go inside, analyze it, and knows that you can use it.
This part of this library, and it will not broke overall.
Safety. You can just rise this justification and your overall safety key chain will be correct, and no problems also, with this.
[58:35]
Yup! Yup! The way I see it right. You have to be careful.
In sight. Unsafe blocks and rust. If you write c plus plus all your code is inside the big, unsafe block.
So you have to be careful all the time. So that's one of the biggest reasons why Ross is so interesting.
Final question is like, Do you hire rouse developers at the moment?
Not as a moment, you know. We had. We were loosing for I even talked about it before that at some point we were looking for, Ross developer for Optimality project.
But it was not so easy a to find to be honest.
The cost customers have very high expectations for forage developers.
And currently, currently, we are more working with this concept and preparing ground for this more intensive grow of rust projects in automotive end of the service, especially.
[59:46]
And then hopefully, projects will start because Intel's is a outsourced company.
We are not product company. So it's hard for us to start some project by our own.
We more working with oem and tier? One companies projects, but we are preparing this basement and preparing that this also one of the reason why we really want to join this conference to show developers.
Okay.
This perspectives, and to show to meet, you know, Marker, that the guys please let's let's start.
Prepare for read. We are working to enable this project, and we are expecting to.
You also will be ready, with some background and level of understanding of after, to join this projects.
Yeah.
Thank you so much. At the end. I want to mention that our poll about the future of routes shown that 43%, almost half of participants expect a lot of projects in the next 35 years around automatically, 4 us and I agree with with that and another 36%, thinks that this's gonna be some activity.
[61:04]
But it's hard to predict it, for now. Yeah, Hi, personally, I have somewhat an insider perspective as well.
But I work at another service camp and another consulting company.
That also does so work for automatic. A lot of things that are happening right now is a groundwork.
And the real work like building exact software that is going to target specific call models that are gonna be released in the next few years.
This work has not started yet, but it may start very, very so either this year.
Next year, the year after which, in car incar industry is incredibly quickly right.
So we are optimistic about it. Thank you so much for coming.
Thank you, Andre, and for answering all sorts of questions, this is very, very impressive work that you are doing, and it's very, very cool to see this work.
[62:04]
This will be done in in Ukraine, you know, in in the company that has a very, very big representation among Ukrainian developers.
So we'll see. We always interested in seeing more challenging in a more important, more critical projects.
Come in on, because we have such a good set of engineers with a very, very good look at skill, set curiosity, and diligence, and we want to see more of that company.
Yeah.
So thank you so much for that once again, and thank you all for staying around for us, asking questions.
Yeah.
And yeah, if you want to know more, we will have links.
We'll have the presentation. We'll have the use released at some point.
I don't know exactly but it's going to be like, in a few days. In a few weeks.
[63:07]
I don't remember, so we'll figure that, but follow the news on telegram on Twitter and other places.
Thank you so much for coming.
Thank you. All nice to hear.
Thanks. Yeah, thanks for your attention.
Bye!
Yeah.

