=== ROW 287 | f015647 | https://youtube.com/watch?v=GSAFsZ-CJUg | 2025-03-28 | youtube ===
[00:00]
Hello friends! This last speech will also be in Ukrainian language.
For foreigners, use
titles, they can be turned on and see
live translation.
I'm pleased to introduce our latest for today
speaker - Pavlo Myroniuk. Pavlo works as a
Rust-developer for three years.
He is mainly engaged in system development. During working hours
Pavel is engaged in the implementation of authentication protocols
and various network protocols, and free from work
time is an important part of our admin team
and Rust-evangelicals.
Pavlo is also a mentor on
RustCamp. For those who haven't heard of RustCamp, it's an intensive
The bootcamp that we host,
[01:04]
Ukrainian Rust community, twice a year
to prepare participants for professional development
on Rust. We've already done a few iterations
and Pavlo participated in each iteration,
starting with the first one. Pavlo is also involved in sports
And, for those who are interested, he can catch up
30 times without a break.
Paul's speech on FFI,
namely using Rust to replace a library,
written in C++, its own implementation.
The difficulties that Pavlo faced,
in a commercial project. Here
As far as I understand, they became part of the
Pavlo's speech and I hope
The speech will be interesting and useful to you.
[02:06]
I ask you to welcome Pavel on stage.
Hello everyone. Can you, please,
Allow screen sharing?
It's off.
Ahh, that's for coordinators.
Wait a minute, let's figure it out now.
Oh, I can.
And yes, it should be visible now. Think
You're good to go. Hello everyone.
As Kostya has already said,
my talk today will be about integrating Rust into
other systems.
A very common case will be the case
when we replace some
C++ or there is an investigative library for a library,
[03:09]
written in Rasti and so on. Before
as we get to the main material,
A little about me. Kostya has already said a lot about me.
Let's summarize a little again. I am once
He has been a developer for about three years. I work for a company
Apriorides. You've already heard what I do.
Additionally, I can also say that I have
have my own blog where I write articles and
telegram in the channel. Telegram channel.
And yes, now let's move on, actually,
to the essence of my report. For starters,
I think we need to explain the situation, because it's not entirely clear
what it means to replace a library.
Roughly it looks like this.
We have some kind of operating system or
[04:12]
We have some kind of program. And in this program
There's a certain API there,
obviously the API through which
This program knows how to ship
different libraries and then
use them. That is, it can be any
extension to the program,
It can be any other extension by type
authorization protocol or some codec there,
or any other functionality.
Take FreeRDP as an example.
For those who don't know,
FreeRDP це є open
source implementation of the RDP protocol.
The RDP protocol has been around for a very long time
It is in every Microsoft.
[05:12]
Windows car. It is used for
dedicated access to other machines.
The whole point is that this
FreeRDP in it
there is a parameter that is responsible for SSPI
Module. I don't need to know what SSPI is, but I
Let me briefly explain what this module does.
SSPI module, it generally corresponds to
for how exactly the authorization to
remote machine. at RDP
it enables us to use our own
module for authorization. And it's easy
It can be assumed that we have a quite possible situation,
when we want to write our own implementation
of some kind of authorization protocol for the RAST and to prosecute it
[06:13]
in this priority.
We write on C++
We don't want to, because it's a lot of difficulties, a lot of bugs,
That's why we decide to write this
library on RAST and the whole
My next talk will be about
How do we best write this library
for once? How Can We Avoid Big Ones?
errors and bugs? And what you should pay attention to
Attention? And how can we better improve our
Codes? So, based on our task,
that we've just discussed, we have certain
constraints, that is, the rules that we have to follow.
The first is API we have it defined,
We can't change it, because if
[07:13]
We'll go back to the previous example,
SSPI –
This is the API that it was developed Microsoft
many years ago, he has support in
many programs, many have already implemented it,
And we can't just go to the same end
say, change us API 15 so that we have
to implement it. That is, API
We already have it defined, we can't change it, and we have to
adjust to it.
And then, since we have API defined, we
There is a salt headers file, and the last one,
we want to write everything entirely in Rust.
I think it's pretty clear and obvious,
What if we want to write a dialect
on Rust, we need to write FFI. And immediately
[08:16]
we can set a lot of different utilities there, which are
in the Rust ecosystem for writing FFI, but we
Now let's briefly go through the most popular of them and see
why in general they don't fit or fit
Only partially for our task.
The first of these is
CByteGen. What is its essence? It is passed
according to your rast code. He's waiting
all major exports, such as Yactu,
YactuzLive, Pub, XRDFN, and so on. And for these higher exports,
It generates headers file for
tamsi or C++ program,
who is going to use this raster
code. In us, the task of the troshka is protillezhny,
Because we already have headers
file, and we need to write our
[09:17]
(a) To the extent permitted by the provisions of this Convention, the Secretary-General of the That is, in
The situation is reversed as in this diagram.
But, wait a minute, I'll interrupt you, please check that in
You have subtitles in Ukrainian, they are poorly generated.
Per second. Oh, now, for sure, for some reason it strayed into
English back. Now there should be Ukrainian ones. Yes, there it is
Something was bad. Thanks. Okay, I mean, I'll sum it up again
this slide. In,
in, instrument, see, beingen, it doesn't suit us
the reason that our situation is reversed. That is, we already have
There is a fresh header file, and we need
Write a racial implementation for it.
Let's move on. Bindgen. There's more to it
One Tula. It's more like one
which is suitable for our task.
[10:20]
This tula, having a certain H-file sishn,
On it, it can generate
RAS EFFI bandits. That is,
As here on the slide, the code on top,
We had sit definishers
structure and function, and bottom at the output
we have RAS equivalents. But the problem is
because, first of all, this tula is designed to
That then these sit bunnings that were generated,
They were used to
to then blinker them
there I associated it with the system implementation and so on
its from RASTA to call the sish code. We're here,
In our task, the situation is different, because we
the following RASTA are required
[11:23]
And we have these features, and we have these features,
And we have these features, and we have these features, and we have these
functions and we have these features and we have these features and we have these features
functions, and we have these features, and we have these features,
And we have these features, and we have these features, and we have
these functions, the code it generates,
Extract Function Headers
and then reuse them in our real-world implementation.
So we move on to the next CXX tool.
In fact, its most important application
This is the secure binding of C++
and RASTA. That is, if we have a situation
when we want to cause C++
code from RASTA or vice versa,
then it's worth paying attention to this
[12:24]
tool. In fact, from this we can already say that it is
It doesn't suit us, but it's better to figure it out,
how it works to know for sure that it won't fit.
Essentially, CSX works like this
in the same way that we
Writing Header Saves
walkie-talkies and then under the hood
all that FFI is generated,
we don't have any access to it there and
it's made in such a way that we just call
function and the way where it is
are safe, although under the hood there
from the headphones the generated FFI is used.
In this case, if we want to
from Rasta to call C++ code,
then macros from this tool
[13:28]
generate a bug for this, and therefore
that's where the New Block feature comes
Store Client it's just called,
as where is this function, although in fact under the
hood will be generated and summoned
bindings, which will then trigger these
Plush realization.
That's how it works. If we have the opposite,
We want to use this plus or plus to call
RAS codes, we have in the externRAS block
write our headlines for
types and functions, then implement them outside this block,
and then, again, at compile time
[14:28]
This Tula, she'll generate it for us, she'll
we will generate rast and c++
Baiding and then with C++
It will be possible to calmly call all the
these features. It's all done in such a way that
so that the user has
or less access to the FFA and to
the more code generated and for it to be, the more secure.
In general, it looks cool, but the context
of this problem that we are trying to solve, it does not fit,
Because, as I said before,
We have API defined, we have it
We can't change it and we have to adapt to it.
And so the only and only solution,
What we have is writing bindings
Hands. Here, for example,
[15:32]
A typical example of a function that would be
in our FFI. It has a secant
header, then it has rack conversions
structures in Rust and vice versa,
and it has calls to Save
Rust Implementation. And in general
it doesn't look like
difficult, in principle, it can be done with your hands quite
write quickly, however, if we take real
API, they have a lot of methods,
they have complex behavior,
There are a lot of edge cases
and so on. And it would seem that our simple function,
in which there's just a transformation of different
structures from one to another, in fact it is very strong
Parting, becoming too much
[16:34]
different places where we can do
A lot of mistakes. And this code that you see on the slide
It is illustrative or not necessary to read. It's just there to
so that you can see
what sizes can
reach such unsafe functions. This code,
it is extracted from
a real library that implements
SSPI. That is, the number of
The unsafe code we have is very, very much increasing.
And now we move on to the second one...
Part of my report is about how we can protect ourselves
from mistakes in our outsider and for more
It's worth paying attention to. And let's get started
From that simpler, there are types. Obviously
that if we write the types incorrectly, we'll have
[17:34]
problems and so on. In general, yes, but the big difficulty is
that in this case these types they are nothing
Checked. The most we can do is we can generate
but from the headphones there are a lot of places where we can do
Error. And even the wrong numeric type,
He can obey us in this way and so on.
If you implement any bug,
Popular API
or some big API,
who has a lot of cross-outs, then perhaps under him already
There are bugs there and you can resist
in existing loans and from them to save up there
certain headlines. Basically, it works
and it can often help.
[18:37]
Then the next breed, no matter what you write,
whether you're integrating your
your own library, or you're just writing baning,
then you wear the types in separate crates,
so that they can be reused later. The bottom line is,
that all the types that are, for example, in the crate Windows
Sys, they can't be reused somewhere.
That is, if we want to Windows
use some structures from the Sys Windows,
then we will not be able to do this. It's simple there
There will be no imports.
The next thing we're going to talk about, of course, is memory.
The api you are implementing, or the api under which you
adjust, it can be quite difficult
with difficult behaviour and in spite of this,
[19:39]
You must follow it completely. Because
You never know exactly how your library
will be used and better done
Everything is as it says in the documentation. Because sometimes
There can be a lot of problems. That is, if in
documentation says,
that a certain operation must take place in place,
i.e. overwrite existing data, then we
That's exactly what we should do. We don't have
create any new buffers, we don't have to assign
pointers to these new buffers, and so on. That is, completely
We follow the documentation. Because if you take
An example from my experience, we had such a joke at work,
that the documentation said,
that the decryption function is happening
[20:40]
in place, i.e. decrypted data,
they have to overwrite the previous cipher,
But we decided not to worry
We were just highlighting
a new buffer, replaced the pointers and so turned to the user.
Basically, it's the user who worked
I read the data on our new indicator and so on
next. Everything was great, but the problem was
was that each of our new warrior buffers, he created
memory leak and user,
He didn't expect us to allocate new memory and so
He did not purify it and thus in us
There's been there for more than a year, maybe even more,
Був memory leak.
The next thing we're going to talk about is UB, but before that,
[21:41]
how we're going to talk about UB cases,
It is worth recalling what it is. UB –
This is what it means from English undefined behavior, it means undefined
behavior. That is, UB –
This is a code for which we have no guarantee at all
on its implementation. That is, UB is non-deterministic
code. That is, we don't have a guarantee there,
what we will get as a result. Maybe it's
will be what we expect, maybe it won't be what
what we expect, or maybe it's in
any condition will break. That is, UBs are the following
places of entrances that
We must not, if possible, allow
which need to be cut and so on. And going over
from this to the topic of allocations. Maybe it's not
[22:42]
quite an obvious point, but RAS and C
They have separate allocators. And even if there is a high or
C++ code
uses our liba, then our
lib and that system code, it will have different
allocators. And that's why it's always worth considering
that if we are in the
if some memory is allocated, then the raster code has this memory
Clear. The same as before si. If the sish
code, i.e. the user's code highlighted some
memory, then only he has this memory with That is,
For example, if you look at the left-hand code,
then we see here that the memory
by 5 bytes, it was allocated by the RST code,
And we're trying to do it right away
[23:43]
Clean it with a sissy delocator.
This is wrong, it cannot be done, and we have it at once
UB. As well as the Dock Guide, he is
the same, but reversed. Here we have highlighted the memory
allocator, but we are trying to clear the
one-time allocator. Again, this is UB.
And there are no options where exactly UB can happen to us,
There are a lot of them, an awful lot of them, there in Raster
Reference is a very large list, you can read it, it doesn't make sense now
retell, but how to
It is we who can check the code with some utilities,
so that we can somehow
protect against Undefined Behavior?
And a utility that I recommend to everyone
to use, we have integrated it into our projects and
[24:43]
so on, it's Miri. Miri is an interpreter
For Summary Representation
raster code and miri goes through
according to your code, it looks at what operations you are there
use and if there is a memory leak
or there's UB and so on, Miri will see it for
example, if we take primitive code
which obviously makes a memory leak that is, we highlight
buffer on the 4th and then we don't
Clean. So if we run it under measure, then it
will find a memorelic with us
16 bytes, will show where we had
(a) To the extent permitted by the provisions of this Convention, the Secretary-General of the Council of Europe shall be entitled to submit to the Secretary-General of the Council of Europe, the Secretary-
It was in the test that it happened.
Pretty cool and very informative.
[25:45]
Or if we take the code you saw before
on the slide about allocators, it's
is the same code in which we allocate memory
and try to remove it with a seed.
And if we run it and drive it away
Through the faith, we shall see,
that Miri will find UB, tell us we don't
We can delete part of the
Rastov only through the secant delocator.
Will show us the place in which we are trying to do it.
Pretty cool too.
And if we've already started talking
about Miri, then every instrument, it's limited by something
And it has its own specifics. Like me
already said, Miri is an interpreter of the intermediate representation
RAS code, then Miri, it can execute
[26:48]
RAS code only. It can't execute C-code there,
He doesn't know how to go on Bindings and so on.
That is, if somewhere in your code there is a system
challenge, then most likely Miri will not be able to complete it.
Like, recently we were at work
forced to change the code because we have one of the
tests there was a system call there to get
host the name of the machine, and because of this, Miri could not
code execute. So I had to rewrite it a little.
Next, Miri can't guarantee that you have at all
there are no UBs in the program. Because
Miri, it only launches
those scenarios,
which we fed him. That is, there are tests, or there is just to run the program,
[27:49]
merge some instances, and so on. And further in moderation,
Since he is an interpreter, on very large tests,
on very difficult tests, where you want any generation,
for example, generating RSA keys there
some big ones, then with such examples it can
be slow. And that's it.
Thank you for your attention. You can ask questions.
Thank you, Paul. I don't know if I've paid
in the chat because I didn't set a timer, but I hope so. I'm not worried,
Everything is fine.
I have a few questions.
Interesting report, thank you for the report.
First question.
Cargo Careful. How does it work under the hood?
Can you explain? No
[28:51]
and not much, because I didn't use it.
Well like, I can tell you what I saw in the red place
in them, but I won't say because I didn't use it.
Ok. Valgrind. We have it
used some time before we found out
about Miri. What's the catch, how did we use it?
We wrote a separate program,
That is, some kind of binary
the file that loaded our DLL in the welts,
which we have written so far, then there I called from it
all sorts of functions, there were different scenarios, and so on.
And then we do this binary test
launched under Valgrind
And we looked to see if there would be any problems or not.
Whether it will find something or not. In fact, it wasn't very comfortable,
but at least it worked and if
[29:54]
There was a memory leak there different, so we saw it.
Thank you, Paul. And the next question.
In addition to C and C++, FFI integration
what codebases have you come across,
With what integration? And maybe,
Jun. Basically, if you write
The FFI we've been talking about is essentially
anyone who knows how to work with C
ABI, which is in fact almost all languages,
then they will be able to use your library.
Practically, what else I have encountered is
Baids under C-Sharp.
Again, they were made there
January experts from our
code, and then the code was written separately
[30:55]
on C Sharp, which wrapped
all the January calls so that they are not visible.
I know
that the library we write,
It is also used on Android,
But we don't support android itself
And they didn't write for it. We know that there are people who have it there
Use.
Have you heard anything about integration with the ZIK programming language?
I don't know if there's...
Automatic Tools
for Zika that they generated bindings, but like
from Zika you can definitely download
[31:55]
or the type above it to call functions.
Again, this will be through sine exports and sine
ABI.
Ok.
Paul, please check the chat, and the next question.
Is it worth using Valgrind in a project,
which has only an increase in dependence,
Is it sufficient in such cases?
a secant code that you can't abstract in any way,
That is, you have it anyway
must be performed. For example, you use
CreateOpenSSL, which in turn has there in any
January challenges. In that case, you won't be able to
use Miri and you have to take
other tules and it will be, for example,
[32:58]
Valgrind. If you don't have any
such restrictions, the measure should be sufficient and
measure will even be better, because Tom
that Miri, it's specially sharpened
under RAFT, it specifically knows how to check a lot of
various jokes related to RAFT. There
for example, Stacked Borrows,
if you've heard of them. Therefore, if you can in
Miri, the better it is in Miri. If not, you'll have to
take something else. 'Cause if you go back to this slide,
then Miri has its limitation.
Yes, thank you.
Check, please, chat. Lots to serve
і пам'ятацій в раз. Ні-ні-ні-ні.
It's not? Chat, chat, just watch the chat.
[33:59]
There's a question about... No, no, there are no questions, there is a request.
Query? Yes.
We can say
yes? You must be
Didn't find the chat. I really have
Q&amp;A. Close the Q&amp;A, please, and open the chat.
There is a request there. Per second.
Ah, I get it. Thanks. And one more thing,
at least one question. Is there a
There is already some convenient way to implement ready-made C interfaces
like Bindgen for further implementation in Rust?
Well, Bindgen is the closest thing to
that we have. I haven't seen anything better.
Yes. And there was more
[35:01]
The question, also a little vague,
Could you summarize
How are such issues resolved? Is it correct
To say that such problems are solved manually?
Yes, such problems can be solved
manually and then covered by tests,
linters, miria, and so on.
Thank you, Pavlo.
Looks like that's it. No more questions.
Pavlo, thank you for the report. Just a minute
don't leave Pavlo and me.
Let me make a closing.
Paul, I think we can hide your presentation.
[36:12]
Short closing.
That's where the conference happened
UARUST Conference
2024. I hope we will have
the opportunity to repeat it next year.
So far, we have collected a little more than four thousand,
However, it is possible that this figure will increase even more, since already
After the conference, they also usually buy additional tickets to get
entry. If you
know who will be interested, please share
link to the conference website with your friends.
Like I said, it's all made possible
thanks to the community.
About fifty people are involved in the organization process
[37:12]
of this conference.
And another 16 people for
within the community, the world leaders who have agreed,
world experts who agreed to take part in our conference.
By the way, some of these speakers are also
will be present at Rust-Conf, which will be
to be held in September in Canada.
Let me remind you about our sponsors. It's NIR, Kumeka Team,
Bohemia Automation, Outbox Systems.
And the only one
The remaining part is autoparties.
The autoparty will take place in Kyiv, there are already a lot of
people in there and in Berlin as well
Not enough people gathered in Lviv,
[38:12]
therefore, there will be autofalls only in Berlin and Kyiv.
And if you're not already in
community, are not in our main chat,
then please join us, there you can follow the latest
news, the events we organize
for the organization of a bootcamp, in which,
By the way, yes, Pavlo also participates as a mentor every time.
And also
I want to thank you for taking part in this,
We bought a ticket, all the funds that we will raise
from the tickets, will be transferred, or rather already transferred
to the Come Back Alive Foundation, which I hope will also help a little
to our Armed Forces in the attack
orcs on us.
Thank you all for participating. Thank you Pavlo.
[39:12]
Have a nice after party.

=== ROW 288 | f015653 | https://youtube.com/watch?v=MLfTw7G2TZ8 | 2025-11-01 | youtube ===
[00:01]
Ladies and gentlemen, get ready to inspire by Lachesar Lechev.
Lachazar is passionate about space exploration and challenges it brings.
He is a community manager for Aerosol and works tirelessly
to promote rust programming in the aerospace field.
With love for open source and talent for bringing people together,
Lechazar is here to spark your curiosity about the future of aerospace.
Please join me in welcoming Lutchazar Lechev. The stage is
yours. Thank you very much for the introduction.
Hello everyone. Let me see the clicker.
Yes, clicker is working. Now. Today I'm going to
tell you how to get started with embedded rust. And this is the nonset
edition. This is only part one of the presentation.
I'm going to tell you a bit more about that later.
First I would like to take this opportunity to thank the organisers
of the UAE Rust conference.
[01:01]
I'm very happy that I can bring such support to
Ukraine and hopefully help people that are suffering the war.
And just massive congratulations to the people organising the
conference. I know how challenging it is. So good job everyone.
Now we have a small agenda for today. Small first
I'm going to tell you about who am I and why I'm
standing in front of you speaking about this.
Then I'm going to tell you a bit about the aerorest community and
some of the projects we are building. Then we're
going to take a look at the tools. This is the main part that we're
going to be drilling down and at the end I'm going to
give you a conclusion. At the very,
very end I have prepared a special demo which is
part two of this, but more on that later.
Now, I'm usually the person that you must come and speak
[02:02]
to if you want to build a spaceship. So I'm very excited about
Aerospace, as the introduction said,
and I usually love a challenge.
My name is Lozar Lechev and on most places you'll
find me as LPL. On x you'll find
me with an underscore and if you want
to reach out to me, dm me.
There's no problem, just reach out. I'm always happy to help.
Apart from being a developer and software engineer,
basically I'm also a community manager
of the aerorest community. I've decided to link just the URL
of the community website because there you'll
find also the discord invite, which is our
main place for gathering. We also have
a blog and newsletter that's hopefully coming
soon. We do want to share more technical
[03:03]
blog posts and also in the newsletter we want to include some of
the resources that our members are sharing in the community and
just condense it and present it to you so that you can ingest with
your pace without following the community. But as
always, it's better to just join the community and learn by
doing. It's a good place to mention
that we are welcoming everyone.
This was the attitude that I felt from the rust community
when I started writing rust. And I wanted
to keep this notion in the euro rust
community as well. So there are no questions, there are no
beginner. I'm beginner.
I don't know what I'm doing, because everyone is there to
learn and develop together. So definitely join in.
Now, the workshop started as an
IRA restaurant workshop at space conference Plovdiv in 2023.
[04:07]
We set out to build a very small workshop.
And on the right, as you can see here, there is a picture of
people assembling the frame. On the bottom right
you see the kit that you have to assemble,
basically with the breadboard and two microcontrollers.
And on the bottom left you see all the components needed
for the workshop. We're still working on it, but that's
why I'm here to tell you more about it. We do have
a few other projects currently in the community which active,
but we're going to be speaking about the nanosat workshop now.
See, clicker stopped working.
Come on.
So before we created the workshop, of course we had to set up
some goals, and there were three main goals that we had to
[05:07]
tackle. First of all, of course, the workshop has to be accessible,
so anybody should be able to source the
material, source the microcontrollers and be able to go through it.
The second is that it has to be beginner friendly.
So if you know a bit of rust or more rust
and you want to get into embedded, this should be
the workshop for you. And of course, it has to be a complete package or
a complete workshop. And that pretty much drove
the decisions on what application we should build.
Of course, on the left, you see that we had a few
crates that we wanted to use, embassy probe.
RS is for flushing and the hardware abstraction
layer and embossy. We're going to talk about it in a bit,
so we'll just skip that for now. And on the
right, you see that at the end, the workshop should
have cohesive exercises. Also,
[06:08]
it should have some kind of functionality. And above all,
it should be useful. So a complete application
that maybe it's done, but still does some
kind of functionality and you can take it from there, develop it further.
Now, the main thing that we're going to talk about is the onboard computer.
Well, that's how they call it a computer, but it really is a flight
controller, which means that it doesn't have operating system.
You want the low level stuff to be very near
the hardware. And in
the conclusion, we're going to be speaking about space applications and
why you don't want an operating system as small as possible.
Operating system. That's actually where our firmware resides,
onboard computer. Of course, you must
have some kind of a power system to
be able to charge the batteries and also a battery to power
[07:08]
everything together.
Now, of course, we are going to focus on the firmware,
and that's where we have gathered here today to speak
about and our firmware. We decided to
have a few components that we wanted to integrate,
the first one being a GNSS receiver. So GNSS
stands for global navigation satellite system.
There are a few constellations, for example, Galileo and GPS,
but there are others as well. We wanted to
have some kind of a radio. So the GNSS receiver, of course,
sends data in a given format, and we want to parse
that in order to be useful to us in the application.
Then we wanted to have some kind of a radio, so a way to send
the data or information remotely or wirelessly
to our kit and back. And for this we're
using currently Wi Fi, but we want to add other kind of
[08:09]
a radio, of course, to reach
further. And of course there should be an IMU.
IMU stands for inertial measurement unit. And this basically
gives you nine degrees of freedom, which means that you have accelerometer,
magnetometer and gyroscope. You can say
how you're orientated, how you're moving in space, and do
other stuff with that information.
Apart from that, we have a separate sensor, which is a pressure and
temperature sensor. And last but not least, in the exercises,
we wanted to include a way to
get the battery percentage, which there is a very simple
way to very few components that you can use to
do this. And we wanted to include it because
if you know the battery percentage and it's dropping, maybe you want to turn off
given peripheral or given task in order to conserve some battery
[09:12]
before the battery gets charged.
And when we're talking about nano satellite,
we actually want to build very expensive nanosatellites,
although in the last years the price has
gone down very much. But it's
still very, very challenging to first prepare a
nanosatellite, go through all the environment tests,
go over the legal stuff, and then still
pay for a launch and then go over the whole operation once
it's in orbit, if it works. Because most of the nano
satellites send a don't usually work, especially from
universities that are just launching their 1st, 2nd or
third nanosatellite, there's high chance that it won't
work. On the right, you see this,
the atmosphere levels, the atmosphere
layers. And it's interesting that Kalman
[10:13]
line is on 100 kilometres, which means that space
is where 100 kilometres officially starts.
But in order to get to orbit, you need to travel very fast sideways,
right? It's not just going up there and staying there.
And there is a very interesting part of the
atmosphere. Let me just zoom in for a bit.
And this is the stratosphere, this part here,
it's very low to where we live, right?
But most of the atmosphere there is just below you, so there's very
little atmosphere. The weather, you actually don't
have that much of a weather. You don't have thunderstorms,
you don't have clouds forming and so on. So it's very calm.
Even if there are winds and stuff like that, that can carry you away.
And this is where usually weather balloons travel.
They can go up to 50 kilometres.
Now I've marked a few interesting
things that you can notice, for example, that around
[11:15]
20 kilometres, it's like -55 degrees outside,
so it's very cold. And also
you do get a bit more radiation, of course, up there,
but most of the atmosphere is again below you. As you can see,
mouth Everest has only 28% of the atmosphere
pressure. And the more you go up,
the less it becomes.
Now, okay, we know that the stratosphere is
a good point if you don't want our thing to just float everywhere
rapidly or be brought down because of weather.
But the question is, how do we get there? Well, I actually
gave you a bit of information already about that. And this is using
helium balloons, of course, although it's not
inspired by the movie up, it's still a great concept.
And if you take a look at that idea online,
you'll find a lot of information, including that NASA
[12:15]
builds these giant super pressure balloons,
which are meant to stay in the
stratosphere for even months.
And they have very high payload
capacity because these are like huge balloons. They are special
kind of balloons. So they stop expanding at some
point. And on the right you see the more traditional approach,
which is using latex balloons,
they usually go to a certain point and of course because the latex expands,
they just burst at some point. And of course you retrieve it
with the parachute, your payload.
Okay, we know how to get there.
We have an idea what to build. Now the question is,
how do we actually start setting up our project?
The first thing that we're going to talk about is embassy.
Embassy. You can call it a framework.
[13:17]
I usually like to call it collection of traits, which allows
you to write asynchronous firmware.
And just a quick note on the right, this is
shortened and taken from the embassy repository.
So if you're interested to learn more about all these topics,
just cheque out the embassy repository.
The idea of putting them here as a list on the right
was to give you an idea how much stuff come into embassy.
And the first thing that you'll notice that there are quite
a few hardware obstruction layers that support embassy.
And there's STN 32, microcontroller support.
There's Nordic semiconductors, there's the Raspberry
PI, RP 2040, even espressif
systems as support for asynchronous and
embassy in their ESPRS parallel abstraction.
Now we have good support with mcus.
[14:19]
Okay, we know it's asynchronous for
writing asynchronous firmware. So it has to have asynchronous executor.
And of course, how you run stuff on the executor is with
tasks. There is a bit more
information about tasks and executor because of how
much space you have on a microcontroller. But it's
out of the scope for this tag. And there
are already production uses of embassy. I myself have used
embassy for a client's project related to aerospace.
And of course, as any project, as any software
solution, there are drawbacks. And I would say the
main drawback with Embassy, well, I can split them
into two, basically two options, two things through drawbacks.
One of the things is that if your driver
crate, let's say you have a sensor, there's a crate for it,
[15:21]
but the API that the crate has is only blocking.
Now all of the sudden you have asynchronous executor
tasks and everything, and now you have to handle blocking operation,
and you need to be very careful with that in your application.
The other one is, of course, you're dealing with async await.
So it might not be very intuitive for
beginners.
Okay, we have one of the main tools
that we're going to use, but now how do we actually set up the project
first? Yes, let's talk about the microcontroller and the architectural
support initially for the workshop that
you saw pictures from last year.
We began with the Espressif C three board, the rust board down
on the right, and the one that we are
currently using for the onboard computer is the Raspberry
PI Pico W, which includes a Wi Fi chip
[16:21]
which we use currently for the radio.
And you will notice between the two platforms that first
you have a different architecture. One is arm, the other one
is Risc five. Then the Raspberry PI
Pico has two cores and ESP 32
has single core. This is challenging
if you want to build the same application for two platforms.
How do you support that?
This is where feature gating comes into play.
I'm starting with the simplest example that
you can have two exclusive features in your project.
I've taken this example from the create for
the Wifi chip from embassy for the Raspberry PI
Pico W, and you can see here that if
both features, GFMP and log are enabled,
then this compiler error gets called and you
[17:21]
get the compiler error. So you cannot even compile your project if
you enable both features.
Now the other thing useful with feature gates,
feature gating, is that you can use aliases,
and not only for features you can use it for, or as you can see
here, typing less.
We can set out to,
for example, build or run a specific binary
enable given features, specify the target that we want
to run or build, or just build a
documentation for one of the projects which is very, very useful.
So the config tomo is your
friend. By the way, I forgot to mention
on the previous slide that nano satellite workshop.
You can find the link down below, but also there's
going to be QR code at the end if you want
to grab the slides as well.
[18:22]
Okay, you have aliases. What else do we have for
setting up our project? Of course, here you can see we already support
the Pico and the ESP 32, and we separate
them using NSS just to ease our life.
Well, other thing that you can do in your config tunnel is
set up default environment variables.
Specify a specific runner. In this case, for the RISC
five platform we use ESP flash to
flush our firmware on the device. And for the
Raspberry PI PQL we use probe,
probe rs. Of course you
can also add other stuff like rust flags. Or when you're building
you can add rust docs, doc flags and so on and so forth.
So really take advantage of that when you're setting up your project.
How do you set up peripherals then?
Of course, feature gating. We already discussed that.
[19:22]
But let's see how we actually do that in the code here.
I've taken example of the main structure and
application structure, which is for the Raspberry PI PQL.
And as you can see here, we can enable Dyesburg C
peripheral for field in the struct with
more than one feature. In this case we only need when it's
running, when the IMU is running. So that's why
we only add one feature. And this will basically remove
the field if we haven't enabled this, this field,
this feature, sorry, now we
have the peripheral. How do we initialise it? Well, the same way
when you're implementing the application and you have some kind of a
constructor. In this case it's a init function.
Again, use config feature to enable this
peripheral. Spawning a task
the same way you have the spawner, you have the executor.
[20:22]
The executor can give you a spawner and you spawn this task only
when the run IMU feature is enabled.
And last but not least, you have the
task itself. You already can see this embassy executor task
macro attribute here. And of course you can
add documentation in our case for the workshop.
Apart from this information that you have for how to calibrate the sensor,
we would like to add more information on how to actually set up or
go over the exercises. So we're going to have different
exercises and more information about how
to make the exercise. We'll go here.
Okay, now in conclusion,
target dependencies versus feature gating I've
seen mostly in the community that feature gating is used.
Maybe you can do specific things with
[21:22]
target dependencies. Maybe it will get messy.
You have to try this for your own project, see if that setup
works well. But feature gating,
even in embassy it's very pronounced and
it's more flexible in the way that as you
saw in the beginning, you can have two exclusive features so
only one can be enabled, but both are supported
for your architecture. Your feature then.
Real time Linux versus Embassy well,
I told you that I'm going to talk more about
operating system versus running something on bare metal. On bare
metal you still can have operating systems, but Linux
is generally considered a very large operating system.
And even though it's real time, there's only preemptive tasks,
which means that you have to deal with the whole complexity
of the whole Linux kernel rather than just your
[22:23]
specific application. And there's very interesting
things when you get to space. There are high
energy particles which can turn your one into zero or
your zero into one. Heat your storage do
some damage, right? And the larger the
dial, the CPU, or the memory size
or the code size, even the more likely is this
to happen and some catastrophic failure to happen.
Of course the low level system are built robust
in a way that they're redundant. You can do the same
thing with Linux. There are companies
in the space industry that for example run
up to three redundant systems
or three redundant kernels doing the same thing. And then they start
comparing to see if one of them is wrong, for example,
to take the right value. Okay,
[23:24]
so embassy is ready for you. Linux,
there's still place for it, right? But now onto
the last point, and this is a special demo
because honestly I'm very very lazy
and I don't want to carry this hardware all the time.
So this is the kit that we're developing and you have
to carry all the things all
the time with you if you want to debug or just do things.
So why not just work on remote flashing?
The more complex demos and
examples will be at expressive Devconf 2024, which is
in September. So definitely make sure to come along and
see the second part of this talk. But now let
me show you the quick example for
today. Now first, what we're going
to see in this case we have the
[24:24]
laptop. It's going to run both a server and
a client, just to make things simpler.
But the server can as easily go on a raspberry
PI be CI or continuous integration
somewhere with connected hardware to it and
doing some kind of work on the hardware.
But for now we're just dealing with this laptop.
First of all, I have prepared here the server,
I'm just going to run it. There's some configuration file that does
a bit of how they are authorised and so on and
so forth, what kind of debug probes you have connected
or can connect to, and so on.
And on the other side we have the client.
For this example I'm using the embassy ADC
example, which is a peripheral, and this is the one that you can
use for reading out the battery percentage.
[25:25]
But let's try to flush it remotely and see what happens.
So now here nothing happens, I'm still working on it.
But on the other terminal you will start seeing
these logs that are coming from the embedded
system and you can see that we have 38
degrees. This is an onboard temperature sensor on the RP
24. Here it's
giving out error just because this
tool is specifically made for running CI. So there is
a limit of how long your task should run. And this task just runs forever,
so that's why it's giving an error. But you can see on
the client side, we eventually got all the logs from
this job, so that's good. We still have some output
from the server and yeah, we just run remotely
flushed our hardware and
with this simple demo, I think I'm
[26:28]
finished. Thank you for your attention. You can find the slides in this
link or you can scan the QR code.
Thank you very much.
So Lachira, thank you so much for your presentation. It was very interesting
and very like,
how does he. It provided a lot of interesting new
information. We actually have a lot of questions
in Q and A. I'll try to prioritise
them appropriately. You're going to read them out,
right? Yeah. Uh, so how does
embassy framework facilitate asynchronous development in
embedded projects? Projects,
uh, how it allows it or. Yeah,
uh, yeah, basically when, whenever you're
waiting for something to happen, let's say an interrupt
to get triggered, or some information to come on
[27:30]
the USB, for example, the executor actually changes tasks
and goes to something else. So that's the
power of asynchronous programming. That's why having a blocking
driver is actually a very big deal,
because you have this asynchronous executor which can do a lot of stuff.
A lot of tasks can run on a single core
and be switched by the executor. But the moment you
have something blocking and takes more time than usual, then everything after
that starts failing. Right. You expect, for example,
the sensor to be caught every 5 seconds, it starts getting, or every
2 seconds or five milliseconds or whatever, and at some point it starts
getting cold less often and less often.
So this is a challenge.
All right, so, but the embassy
framework itself does not have asynchronous primitives.
Primitives? What do you mean as a primitive?
[28:33]
Like something which returns a future or an executor.
Yeah, there is the executor. And basically you can have asynchronous
functions as tasks. There are
some limitations, you have to cheque them out. And how embassy
works underneath, it's a different topic
that I don't want to get into right now. Okay, that's fine.
Are there any challenges in supporting multiple boards
in a single project, and how can we overcome
those challenges? Yes,
so we started with the espressif board,
and later I decided to add support for the Raspberry
PI Pico, which is a challenge and still is
a challenge because you have to set up all the features
correctly and in a way that allows
it to be flexible. So this probably was the biggest challenge and still
is the biggest challenge, just dealing with all the features.
[29:34]
For example, the embassy executor for the PiCo needs one feature,
for the espressif board needs another feature.
What I personally did for this project was to have the onboard
computer application and then two separate crates which
have their own application struct which gets called at the
onboard computer one why I decided
to do it this way? Well, just adding support
for both platforms at the same cargo Toml file
will be a challenge and you have a lot of dependencies.
So I decided just to split the dependencies in their own crates for the
different applications, the two different applications,
but be caught in the top application down
board computer. That's how at least I've set up
the multi board support,
right, understood. Thank you. So the next question the
person asked Botan asks, I know that Pico has
[30:37]
PIO. I assume it means programmable IO. Does ESP
have something similar? If yes, is there an abstraction layer
for it? So expressive
is taking on the challenge to support their community,
the rust community. So they're doing all the work for the hardware
abstraction layers and they generally have
very good support even on the non std version.
Shout out to Omar, who probably finished his
talk already, but he was the one that came to to Bulgaria
to perform the workshop with with me on the space
conference, I think.
Yeah, I lost my Pio.
Yeah, I'm not sure about the espressif, sorry, I forgot my
my sentence, but I'm not sure about espressif.
But it's very easy to cheque. I personally haven't used Pio,
[31:37]
but it's used for many things, including outside
the rust community. I've seen very interesting applications for the
Raspberry PI Pico, so definitely cheque out some
articles. Thank you. So speaking of workshop,
is the repository enough to complete the nanosat workshop?
Do you think it's a good first embedded project for someone who is
already someone who already has rust skills?
The goal is to be, as of today,
we're still working on the actual implementation
once the application is done and
we have a set MVP version for the hardware
because we want to support our community with this hardware.
So we're going to start selling an MVP product soon.
Hopefully by the end of the year we will have pre order.
So definitely watch out the community and subscribe
to the newsletter. But generally
[32:40]
the current version of the workshop is not ready.
There have been many problems even with the old version and
with the new version. All the code is there. So we need to
remove it and write the exercises to tell you. Okay,
now set up this peripheral. Now do this. And do
it in exercises split by sensors,
by different features that you can add and so on.
Thank you. And do you have, like.
I know it's a bit of a hard task. Do you have an estimate?
When do you expect this to be in a good
state? Definitely for the pre
order, I think we should have something or by the end of the
year. Currently, we are focusing on
the hardware just because the application itself also has some issues.
So we are debugging testing. We want to fly this kit as
[33:42]
well. So put it on a helium balloon,
start testing, because there are many challenges that you need to
overcome in order to make it useful. For that
kit to be useful, it needs to be doing something useful.
You need to be able to put it on a balloon, send it for
it to survive. Otherwise it doesn't make sense.
But the idea of doing like some kind of a crowd crowdfunding
campaign with preorders and also, you know, support in that way,
the aerost community and the efforts in the workshop are
the way that we are looking to do everything.
Workshops. Can you name maybe a simple workshop for embedded
devices?
Well, there are a few rust embedded
books online. I know Omar wrote
a book about embedded, but workshop like
[34:42]
this one, that takes a bit more general approach.
Many peripherals, many exercises. I personally
don't know about any, but there might be.
And just have a look. Understood. Thank you.
Speaking of hardware, does the nanosat include some manoeuvring
system or will it orbit until it burns in
the atmosphere? The easiest one
is to add magnet torques, which are
just coils,
winded wires that you can use
to apply voltage.
Make basically a magnet and orientate
the satellite based on the magnetic
field of the earth. Currently, our one
is very simple. It's made to be accessible. We are
trying to make it as simple as possible and as easy as possible.
But for different applications of these kits,
not even in space, but as you saw, the stratosphere,
[35:44]
we have a few applications and we. We are starting
to look at propulsion as well. So a way to control
where the balloon goes, which can be very
useful if you have specific payload and you
want to put it in a specific place. So it opens up your
challenges, but it solves a lot of things. You don't need Starlink,
right? If you put the right antenna and power on
this thing, it will undercut Starlink. For example,
why orbit? Right?
Right. You're absolutely correct.
So does your system use
bare metal RT OS or some embedded OS?
So embassy is the framework
that you're using to build your firmware. So you don't have any
operating system, no real time operating system. And embassy
does support preemptive tasks. So you can have one executor with
[36:46]
low priority tasks and one executor with high priority tasks.
But I personally haven't used that. So definitely cheque out the
embassy examples. So, do you know
which microcontrollers are popular in
nanosets?
From my limited knowledge, I know that some
of the startup companies are using STM 32 as
a microcontroller for their systems.
For the rest of the. Yeah, the rest
of the industry, it really depends. Some are using common off
the shelf components, universities and so on. Some decide
to use radiation hardened or radiation
resistant chips, which are generally with
less power or less
capabilities, bigger, but are very,
very reliable in these tasks. So it really depends
[37:48]
which route you decide to go. I haven't dealt
with radiation hardened or radiation resistant
chips, but you can find information online.
All right, and the last question, what strategies can
be employed to integrate rust with legacy embedded system
that uses non standard or proprietary hardware interfaces?
What references rust have?
So, for blog posts or
other resources that you can cheque,
currently I cannot tell you if
they exist, but there are a few people in
the community that have worked with, let's say, a c
library that provides support for a given chip.
One of the people in the community decided to make a driver
crate for a small radar
[38:52]
that you can use. And I
don't think they wrote any kind of workflow
or how to do it, but I know it's possible. So you can integrate,
probably you can integrate rust in old embedded
projects if you steer away of any kind of peripherals
and so on. But do some of the logic in rust and just
cross the boundary.
Or you can integrate C into rust, as we all know.
So I personally
didn't ever learn C. I tried a few times.
I felt miserably. It had to be rust. You know, when you try to learn
c for a few times and you fail and
then rust comes along and then, oh, all of a sudden,
yes.
That actually concludes all the questions.
[39:55]
So I would ask one more question, which is,
what kind of result would you expect from a successful Microsoft launch?
Well, to work, the first thing is to
work and not launch it, and then just figure out
that something went wrong. Because even NASA fucks up,
right? Even the big people are fucking up,
like big time sometimes, but that's why there are processes.
There are so much things I
can generalise as things that you must know in
order to launch a satellite. And we're not only talking about the technical
part. Right. You have all kinds of standards, all kinds
of institutions, law and so on, to. To take upon
before you actually launch it. So it's a very, very capital intensive
and time
consuming effort. So if you launch something
[40:56]
and it works, that's the first thing you have to cheering
for. Hopefully we can get to space. I know
it's a very challenging path forward, but that's why
we took a different approach, just building
something that can still be useful here on Earth, to people here
on Earth, without launching into space. But it
is a path forward to actually get our community to launch a satellite
at the end. Thank you so much.
Yeah, this is an excellent presentation and I hope
everybody here enjoyed it as much as I did listening to you
and. But that concludes the presentation
and we can go. Yeah. Thank you
very much. Enjoy the rest of the conference.

