=== ROW 280 | f015644 | https://youtube.com/watch?v=KbgeaHou2qU | 2025-03-10 | youtube ===
[00:11]
Hello!
Yuck software like the hard work.
[01:35]
So. Thank you. Paul, let's start.
How long.
So, what I will talk about today, I will talk about how the compiler understands and sees such a type as a generator, as my team and I decided to look into the compiler's diabra.
And to understand how it works, in order to be able to get the information from it, which we really needed in order to save this generator in the database, 3 a little about myself I work in the company, alantis as the head of the gas department
development and also as a technician on one of the projects, here we are engaged in the development of software for Bken and Solyushin, and what we will talk about today, we will talk today about what a generator is. In general, it is in order to
to have an understanding of how it works, what it is used for, what problem we tried to solve on our project, how we as a capilator sees the generator, and how we obtained information from it about the generator as a cue
[02:56]
I'm sending what we found in order to save the generator to the database so that it can then be used.
You can see on an example what a generator function is and how it differs from an ordinary function, that is, an ordinary function, it is a function that has a beginning and an end, that is, an entry point and an exit point, no intermediate states, it
does not have it, you can run it and get a generator result from it, in turn, it is a function that can have an intermediate state. This function, which is indefinite, has a beginning, it has Po.
[03:58]
When every time we determine the depth or selfie, banachi uu and the generator does not do the calculation every time, it remembers the last calculation that was done ie the last 2 numbers and just adds them and the last one
result i.e. each time, the function stores the intermediate value.
This is how the generator looks in general, and it looks roughly like a raid generator, which has parameters, a resume function, and types of parameters, that is, what intermediate states it can return through
Gild parameters he can accept When we make a Summary and what parameter can return when I myself finish my work in a computer sample generator opki type, that is, its structure is not visible to
[04:58]
user What the user can see about the generator, for the fact that it implements the third generator and nothing else Well, what is its internal state, what is its representation of structures and none of this can be seen and I will tell today how we
they saw it, er Well, what is it, if you dig a little deeper, dig into what a generator is, a generator in general is a function that turns into a standing car, if we talk about times, then in a sample there are 3 main states that are for each generator.
They are created when the generator itself is created, this is an anaresumterative panic andreum before the generator starts, ritual is when it ends, that is, it is already completely over, panics are when something happens, not so during
generator, it works and there is an undefined number of states, it all depends on how many eld rhythms are inside the function generator itself, it can be like 1 or such a number depending on how this function is written, that is, it is in the generator by
[06:17]
basically, means that in this generator, the return value is returned and the generator will be in one of the states Suspen tandem if you look at this example, then suspense tandem as For example, if you look at this example, then there were 2
Guild generators and accordingly 2 intermediate states in which the generator can be before it ends and before we move on.
In order to understand how this generator generally looks in the capilator, I will give an example on which I will show today.
All results. Research is an example. Such functionality.
Such a process as sanin the system through the code This process can be described as a generator task, that is, when we create a user generator, the generator is given a phone number in order to be able to send and therefore the picot also later
[07:25]
This one is received from the user, and validated that it is the same as we generated, sent that it is not the same as we generated and from the rule, this is an example, quite simple in production codes, not
is used purely to show how you can use the generator, this is the ability to store something inside the system and if, for example, look at the first state of the system, when we start the function itself, we transfer
inside the phone number, the function generates the guardian is sent to the PI code on This phone number.
And then it is in an intermediate state, that is, the Guild Wheel is called. It is possible to make a Ritual from the Guild, that is, some value, turn it like this, and you can, when the mode will take place, you can go to this place, Deild stopped, for example, line 12, you can
[08:27]
transfer the value externally when the function summary is called, accordingly we expect in this function what command the user will transmit, externally, for example, he wants to send the Picot again accordingly, the function generates a new
So Picot sends again. The user saves this example in an internal state and continues to wait for a command from the user.
That is, when the user sent the code, we want to validate the function by checking the code that it generated and sent with the code in the parameters when
The resume was sent. If it matches, we are logged in.
If it does not match. So we did not enter the system and there may be an uncertain state when the command is transmitted, the disabled generator is in standby or resent or validate and we gave him, for example, a number, a new number
[09:33]
phone, it is better for such a case to generate another generator and here we show the media function, how it looks, how you can call this generator using OK, that is, we take the summary, call it and transfer it to it.
The phone number and it returns the state in which it is at the next resume, we send another command, resent, and it again returns the state in which it is and the last one transmits with the eye subcode and wait,
from him that he will return the sex or the file.
So what were we trying to do? The Ot generator: an example of use with a self where there are intermediate states that need to be saved, this is quite such a small example, he showed, and what generators are actually capable of, that is, with the help of generators, you can describe complex
processes that have Intermediate states that can be easily That is, it becomes a kind of machine and we thought that if we take the state of this generator, save the database to disk, for example, whether it is Duyson, at some other moment we will take
[10:52]
we deserialize this Jason back into an object and continue from the place where we stopped last time, i.e. if the system is improving, it can simply take this Jason later and make a summary with
the place where it ended.
How to do it Before we get into how we did it, let's talk a little bit about structure.
Compiler. What does it look like because it is important to understand what methods we used to get information about the representation of the dpa generator into the compiler if you look at the official site
since it is possible, they have an article that describes the structure, the compiler, which Internet representations of the levels it consists of.
[11:53]
three-present actually once at a given level.
It converts the code. In It is more understandable for the compiler, that is, for example, the handicaps are turned into loops with break conditioners and other simplifications so that the compiler can work with them.
And then the Peace on the Measure actually builds a big tree of transitions.
And at that level, there is no relation to the code that can be read by a person, in fact there are solid solid trees, transitions, solid shells that are very difficult to read, then it works, optimizes and turns into a machine code
the code, and in fact, what is not on the official website of Erast, between the skin and the measure, there is another level called the tier, the so-called type of wellinter-presentations at this level is just the compiler, more
[12:59]
works with types, how they are represented, how they will look from a distance. So, in fact, this level is the most important and most interesting for us, because it is with them that we will mostly work. There is such a thing in the compiler, sometimes
crate interface that can be used and this thing allows, in essence, to write a program that will call the compiler interface, to compile some code, which means that it is possible with the entire structure,
compilers work to extract the information we need. That is, once you have connected your interface, you must pass it the files you want during the execution of your program so that it compiles, and you can
writing code in such a way as to extract information about the types that are in these files can be done through a macro step, for example, run it as we did, that is, before compiling the program, you can write about a macro that will call
[14:07]
rss interface that will extract all the necessary information about types and will pass generate code based on this information, the main type is the Rast middle Thai, in fact, it is the main
structure that stores information about all types inside the compiler, and it works most closely with it at almost every level.
From hir to barking, it ends there.
From ez.
And so, somewhere like this, the Luyalt generator looks like through the eyes of the compiler, when it comes to the generator that I showed above, with the example itself, that is, it has 4 states andreund return panic, and saspit 0
[15:19]
Suspense zero listed. How many types does it contain inside, that is, in this state, how many objects does it store inside, and here you can see that it stores the phone number of the picot of the Bull and the same arcs
structures for transferring the arguments themselves inside the phone number inside the generator.
compare and was actually this way it keeps track of whether the function ended successfully or failed with the states.
Andreyunteraturm and Paniki everything is clear.
They are defaulted. And with the Suspend 0 state, it's a little more complicated, because having this information, from the compiler, we still can't say that suspend 0 is a structure that has 4 elements and you can simply
[16:24]
put these 4 elements and make For example, casting and determine and extract data about the state of the generator itself, we went a little further.
And we are a compiler that allows us to get not only the generator itself, but it allows us to get a life hack of each of its states, that is, of each leg, dynamo and what it looks like. For example, you can look at layal tsapid zero.
What is his site 64 bytes lining 8 bytes and you can see these structures the most interesting files where it is shown which offset and from this section you can understand, for example, how
The structure looks with the eyes. Computer, and knowing from the previous slide that there are 4 elements, taking, for example, the size of each element. For example, the size of the background is 24 bytes and you can look at
[17:29]
for example, 24, the byte is actually here behind the set.
32 That is, the fund number is like the first element, in fact, in the structure, it is the second element, the first element is the sanin arguments in which sais of 32 byte its offset of the beast
i.e. the first element in this structure will be sanin arks, it will be placed then Fon number.
element and the fourth element is Narizal himself. He put it as it was. It is 1 byte and it has a size of 58. All this can be extracted.
From the compiler itself, having this information, we thought that in principle we can take the compiler interface, extract the information from it on the computer through mackus and generate the necessary for us
[18:38]
structures in order to be able to cast a generator into some structure, hang a soeralization on it and save it. For example, this is also a dream object, and then you will zoom in on it somewhere later.
And we started looking for a way to do it Well, and do it?
It's actually quite simple if you spend some time understanding how the compiler works with these structures.
Actually? This is how the structure looks like from this sanilgenerator.
That is, there is a union that monitors the state of the generator itself, in our example, it looks like the arrival rhythm of the panic and the suspension of the stars, the suspension is described as a structure here you can see what it has
alignment and ordering of the objects themselves, that is, the arguments themselves go first, Fanamber oti picot sanin Innresalt and so on.
[19:42]
This Mn. So! This is an important thing because it is actually stored in all the structures here.
For example, I did not show But Anna Zyum these are not simple objects.
Here. These are also structures. Which have 1 element.
It actually shows us, it actually stores information about what state the generator itself is currently in. That is, if we take, for example, a function on the generator, the discriminant, then the same discriminant, so yes
determines in which state from zero to recovery to three the generator is now located this is an existing element of every structure we determined that it is implicit
information We thought that it is possible, in principle, to write a procedural macro that will generate these structures for us, and we can write a small casting that will simply copy the state of the generator to our
[20:56]
to our General structure, i.e. We will copy all the data from the generator to our structure, it is already a care type, i.e. it is already a type for us with which we can do any actions, make functions, hang others
the third can be hung and we can already use it as we like.
And later. We can take this generator and restore it, that is, for example, it was implemented in Jason, deserialized back into an object, and started from the place where it ended, but a very important point is that in order for this
do. I took a copy of the generator and I saved it somewhere, then I implemented it back in Odesa into an Object and I want to transfer it back to the generator because I just like that, I won't call the generator on it because it doesn't implement
[22:01]
this trade and in fact the capilator will not allow it, it will not understand what I want to do for it, so I need to add it to an implicit generator, like and for this I need to have at least the initial state of the generator.
Even in Andreyunt in Anriyun Stan, I can simply create an object of the Saning generator itself without summarizing it, that is, simply create a type, attach my structure to this type and call a summary on it
and even then, at this moment, my generator will start from the place from which it was previously, in which it was previously stopped from that state, that is what we carried out when our team worked on this generator, what was carried out and that the generator, as
its function can actually be very interesting in terms of describing some typhoon processes.
[23:03]
Sami This is a very small example of how to do it. There can be much more Examples of much more.
There can be no states, in principle, you can make them either with the help of state machines and freem vorks, they become machines with callback functions or with the help of a generator that will operate on the internal state
independently And only accepting input parameters from the outside and relative to what state it is in now will decide what to do so the code can become a little more frequent from this, but it is a little not very clear way of describing such things, that is, if describing
for example, Fibonacci counting. So this is a typical way to do it, but describing more complex l-processes is not the same as how it is used in the industry, they usually use the site of the machine, but
[24:14]
and after finishing this research, we saw what risks, that is, firstly, that the generator is actually an element of unstable where.
Compiler. That is, it is now part of the stable version of the language, although they are built on partial implementations of this generator. I have a generator that uses 1 and the same engine and senkit as well
state functions that store the internal states of the landscape, the generator, it is not very stable, that is, the compiler from the conpile to the company can change this state, which tells us that every time we compile
program You have to look at Loyalt, our generator, in order to have the latest Data and it makes it a little difficult.
[25:17]
They are difficult in customs, and you also need to write a pretty good library for generating these types, and you also need to somehow think about how to reduce the share of compilations, because to use them, in fact, it is like a double compilation if
use procedural macros. This will significantly affect the compilation there and we will need it. In fact, penfol is a thing that, in the end, is that there is a very large one, and the generator, with proc macros, has increased even more
this company time? Many times Well, and that this thing is actually very difficult, we go because if the developers of the computer, they decide to change something in the interface, then we will have to follow it, or we will not be able to update
[26:17]
to the new version of the compiler, or the tradition of redoing or reanalyzing what changes there were, and finalizing your code, we learned such lessons, after some time of research we decided that OK, the generators are not yet ready to be used in
We ended our research on production code names on this, although there were plans to make a pass to the compiler so that they would give the opportunity to clearly take the state of the generator and save it further.
We did not go on this, I have everything. Thank you for your attention.
So ready to listen. Question.
[27:21]
Hello.
I say Why can't Mm hear you?
So. So.
[28:38]
This is just if, if you dig very hard, you can do it that way.
But you always have to look at this, here is my answer, you have to always look at how much effort is needed to implement such a thing and does it really make sense?
That's it.
We, for example, researched it in detail and worked with the compiler, worked in the compiler and wanted to prepare for a pause. But business is such a thing, it is very strict, let’s say Yes, the efforts that will be received
from the fact that we will do it, there are not always vectors for it, and it can be done, we just need to put in a lot of effort in order to implement it, but I think that many people would be grateful to us for such an implementation.
[29:58]
Taka. Repeat. Please. Yeah.
No, this is not Open Source. That is, we did these studies and got the results.
And here are the results. I show, but at some point we decided that we will not continue to control this project.
No, I have not heard about this raid, and if I had, I would certainly be able to talk about the effect, but they did not prove it, meet.
I think functions use a mechanism similar to generators for internal representation.
Is it possible to use trustee interface to generate structure, to represent intermediate suspectsension states of emphasisc function?
[31:08]
Can this be done? That is, if used once. Its interface actually says that this function is synchronous, it allows you to get all the necessary information in order to be able to do what we did with the generator, I will repeat in
generators and spikes in them are 1 and the same yn used by the compiler, so it can be done.
Underneath.
No, it will be even more difficult than the generator to make.
[32:10]
In fact, the layout can change from the build.
In fact, there seems to be a network that indicates that this type of randomization will not be very Randomization will not be very Randomized, that is, it will be possible to predict that the same person barked and we can use
Cache, for example, in order not to run these proc macros every time, but for example, if the new version of the compiler is changed as rules, for example, the creation of this option, it turns out that we have this structure that can somewhere
we will not be able to resettle in the database. For example, it will be necessary to restore and describe the rules of Migration from the new hundred of the old way that conners were presented to the new E.
[33:26]
No.
I know what you're saying. There was an offer. But I don't know how far it is.
Came in No, actually They put it in the compiler that there, without changing No, this webinar will be the same and it would actually simplify because very often.
They use these deterministic builds in order to compare, for example, binaries or sometimes no one uploaded this binary if nothing changed in the code. But at the time when we were doing research there, there was
the function that generated this barking and it was directly stated in the text that it was a chimney, that it was a process, that is, it is impossible to trust that it will be the same from the build.
[34:29]
these are deministic. In order to be able to trust, well, that would actually solve a lot of issues for us.
We could not worry about many issues, we could not worry about the fact that this thing that we would make would be very sharp in production because we assemble the code once and everything will improve, then it was very cool.
Huh. If you remember it like that, it seems to me that they used both for the sake of security and for the sake of this representation of types.
It was packed as much as possible so that these structures do not swell too much, but I think that is the main reason.
[35:35]
These are the Sikerites. Was it?
So. So. You can dig further into the compiler, that is, take this interface this time and look further.
What? He?
No No warm! Animals No!
Okay. Now.
Can you repeat it? The second part Hearts of what?
[36:38]
So what are they Ping. They use it that way because it is needed to give a guarantee that the object will not be moved there and that they will not fight, in fact we did not enter, we understood earlier that we do not need to continue
research has so far tackled this problem.
It was with the Pin type at this stage when we finished with the loyalt with its generation there.
Another question arose as to when we will use the Union only for objects.
What is not a copy ball, you need to use maniol, drop, somewhere at this stage we realized that it is very cool.
But to prove it to Production is a separate project and easier.
And we started talking, with the architect we started talking about what might be better to do, crawled Kombyl to the team, to give them such a proposal that they add the ability to extract the state of the generator itself.
[37:51]
Again, due to the fact that there are task priorities.
Are we up to that? They did not arrive, although I think somewhere in the future.
We can get there.
So. Dad. Metastyles, on such examples of synthetic ones that I showed and blue ones, and it worked normally, I think, 1 of the reasons why we stopped further.
Going through the fact that there was still a lot of work to make sure that it can be implemented and it will not fall somewhere wrong, work.
Be!
[38:52]
Macros Pisheshmakras Macros allows you to use an external crate in order to perform some action by connecting your interface and in fact it allows you to launch the compiler interface when
Are you compiling the program?
That's 1 more candidate No, That's 1 more compiler.
In Russia, there you can really play with the optimization of this thing, as Pavlo said, but this is still 1, in fact, the stage of compilation, through which all the steps are taken, and it is also very important during the crisis of Bildas.
[39:53]
And these are the same compilers, i.e. different interface satchels.
Is it the same compiler? Which one do you have in your car?
It costs the same version, it just gives you the opportunity to watch in your program.
Okay.
Let's say it to the date, Yes, I can't say now, Because we're going on like this.
They worked on practice in order to understand whether it is possible to do it at all. But I think that it is the same with this problem.
We also met what this world could be.
Okay.
We use Secgres.
It is more secretive by the Republic team and in fact, we wanted to describe the processes for aggregates through generators.
[41:00]
For example, we had a generator that talks about the user.
And this generator. It would create information about the user's status in the system, for example, I registered in the system, ie, generator, gender.
In such a state, which says that you have registered, I changed the password in the system, it changes the password, and accordingly its state, already with a new password, that is, such things, more global, we tried to determine when to describe some entity by
using the generator itself, for example, the user.
In the system, actions performed from the outside are simply a command that is passed to the generator, and it is possible to transfer, for example, use, to another state, for example, password change, it goes from a state, such as a password change, and waits
until This password is confirmed or something like that Is that right?
[42:00]
Now what I'm trying to remember, from which examples, plus any entity in the system, still has some state, and it's just about the fact that these states of coins we also used vensourcing that these states they
events are rolled in. Then, when registration takes place, we simply take and, for example, roll out the same events and bring the system to the state in which it was in the areas of the new team, and through the generator it
could be done because the state of the generator itself could be used as a Snapshot.
Well?
[43:03]
Yes, the usual old code in the old ceiling, that is, we have si-ky orest, and it has names and players, it has command handlers, every action in the system is logged, for example, which seven page then
is rehydrated and it is written through the Garden of Comanhandler and venta Player functions, the usual structure, these comanhandlers process them, a certain amount is written depending on the number of commands, i.e. such
A typical approach to writing a framework is some kind of strategy that implements, for example, a process, and it has command handlers, it is transferred to the sadkomat inside, depending on which command came and calls, for example, one or the other
the function that it knows to handle this command.
[44:23]
Nata.
So.
With Me, it seems, at hand.
Hmm!
Can you speak English? It.
These days.
[45:23]
Oh, okay. When you create generator, right? When you when you create a new inst of generator and then set up the state to the generator, what kind of type this generate? A has?
Is it like a Dean trade object, or is it something else?
What's the type of the variable, the torque, the generator.
It's like a three-bit, that is, everything that can be understood that this generator implements, Tet and everything that we can use it to call this summary and nothing else, in general.
Got it got. It makes sense so like if we try to do similar thing with a sync functions, we would just get a future, whatever right?
Okay.
Uhu Well, that is, with aspens, the question sounded very similar with aspens, it's actually a cupcake.
It was my question. It was my question, yeah, yeah.
Thank you. 3.
[46:23]
Sure.
It just generators themselves. They like you said. It's a nightly feature, but it's interesting to be interesting to try something like this with a sync functions because they themselves are stable.
Eh?
Even though the internal representation, like I said, it changes all the time.
Maybe it's not their own.
This is actually a very interesting question, because the generators themselves are in the ensemble. But even if you look at the presentation, the person who made this prole of the generators, made it in the compiler, asinyka and generator, use 1 and that
the Enjin itself is for these states and it is interesting that they are stable asins and the generator has not been able to start a stable cycle for several years.
Umhm, if you try. Actually, if you try to debug a sync code using Intel, J, like either idea or C line, or whatever they have, arouse debugger, if you debug a scene code, it will go through this generator, code you will see this yields and everything.
[47:37]
Ta-ta-ta
So it's it's like, Yeah, it's it's all up and running.
They just don't want to send it and if you look into it they're like them.
We want to standardize it. I looked it into Rfc.
For January is, too, because it's very, very strange when you have a language that has a sync away, but not generators.
So what they say is, we want to standardize it, but we are afraid that them might be some corner cases that we haven't discussed, and because we haven't discussed, we don't want to standardize.
Yes, that's interesting. When will the Generators be added.
Cry.
I don't think it's gonna happen soon. To be honest, I think that everybody is happy to keep them on for, like I don't know for ages, maybe forever.
Well, actually what you said is true? And there are many crates.
For example, what is the name of the generator, they actually tried to create it, it works, but I will not say that it is a production generator, created with the help of macros, that is, it is a macro that returns what is needed and it is not bad in order to
[48:56]
to learn Just definitely not production-ready and we saw this crate.
What it is, but I decided that it would be cool to use the built-in feature of the language and with the generator, because when you use the built-in, it is more stable than, for example, using a crate, which is not very
production-ready there. It looks more like he is there to have fun.
Yeah.
Lot, mushrooms.
And what?
[50:32]
So.
And the point is to stop short by media or summer.
So. Thank you for the question: And as for generators, they can be used. That is, for persin, it makes sense to move, but in fact, it’s how to watch from which distance, if, for example, you watch purely for appetite, then it is. It’s great, it will perform the task. But if
for example, look at Sik-ores and Ivan Sorsing and Sikera, this is a way to divide the lineages in the Wright model to roll there, Eventa players, Komanhailers, and so on.
[51:43]
And what is, for example, aggregate work or aggregate, that is, it is an entity that describes the state, that is, it is an element that describes the state of some business entity, in the system, and we tried to make it, that is, they are also aggregates
have, as you said, business- Er data Lair That is, the aggregates are also stored, in fact, the aggregates themselves are not stored in the system, but they are stored when a snapshot is taken, that is, the snapshot itself
generator, but in order to write a generator, you need to describe Fremburg to take For example, a convenient way for a name.
There are taplayers, komanhanders, these Ivans, they are transferred to the database, but you have to take a snapshot of Garegat himself once in a thousand events so that there is a long process during registration
and here is the generator. In this case, it also fits very well. When you want, take a snapshot of the generator itself, you just take its state in which it is now and make a snapshot of its entire internal representation and
[52:58]
write to the system. That is, in fact, the same task is performed with the creation of a snapshot of the aggregate in a different way, and it will also allow writing these aggregates in a cleaner way, that is, it is not necessary
no structures and you simply describe a function, for example, a user, a generator, you create fields inside this function and that's it. This thing lives with you as a structure until the system is destroyed. That is, it
Let's say yes, the generator is a combination of structure.
Plus the trait is the implementation of this trait. And the generator is a function that will automatically turn into a structure and implementation of functions. Well, what about the bindings of the business layer and the data controller, for me it is
the same level of inconsistency appears.
[53:58]
Which when writing structures and functions, because everything would be equal, there would be another alarm that works with the watchman of the generators themselves, the generator itself, itself.
B could not create this layer and it would be in a completely different place, and as for the binding, to the language Well, that is, if, for example, we implemented this method through Generators, the only option would be to work, for example, to take another language
programming, also connect to quores and vensourcing and write, for example, what, for example, this formation language could work with this system, it is correct to correctly describe the Structures in this language
programming, such as For example, events will roll and so on.
Although this is not really a problem.
I hope I answered the question.
What hmm?
[55:27]
No person is actually possible. It's pretty hard, then.
Yes. Date, that is, the limitation is like a limitation and that it requires a lot of investments, and technical and to do it and even close communication, that is, while we did it 1 times, 5-6 times the discor where the teacher, the compiler of the team came
I communicated with them so that they would give an understanding of some things there, and we would even, as I said, think about making our proposal.
But this is no longer an applied problem. That is, it is a task that requires direct allocation of time.
Work. A lot and even then she will give an effort, that is, some veler for business, so we stopped, but this is absolutely what you said, it would take away the need to use For example, some kind of framework for writing become machines,
[56:33]
I have experience with writing standing machines, in various fields, these plus plus including and they do not look very friendly.
Yes, Well, what about vmbed? Yes, but in a cool example, diabetes was given to the point that you input, for example, a car standing on the barometer is a typical approach, in fact, the car standing there is used absolutely everywhere.
But
Oversee it.
[57:52]
No, here you actually have to think about how it can be implemented.
It's already more. Probably, with the functionaries, with which I am not very familiar with using some thought, I will add something similar.
In order to be able to describe a very similar state, I remember when we first started I looked at denotations.
In order to understand how they work and it looked like it would give an opportunity to actually do that, but the truth is that there are no muzzle notes to the manada in September.
[59:19]
Well, like this.
Multiple.
Well, it's just a kind of way of doing, let's say, doing processing of what's there in the old ways.
Many hundreds of 1,000 projects are already being developed and just make it more convenient and understandable.
Perhaps, to some extent, rather yes, but now you can hear. But you can hear me now.
No. Okay.
That's how I ended it because, let's say it like this, what we did with the generator to notation is an approach to writing things that are written in a different way, they are simply written not so beautifully, they are written that way and that's all.
[60:27]
It all depends on whether the industry is ready to invest, for example, that is, a bunch of projects, written and working on not very elegant code, but the importance is not how beautifully written, what it does is important, so I think, such
cool stuff that manifests itself in conditions, programming they do it by enthusiasts, and topics For example, by companies that really see the problem and for example, better writing code it will affect the goals not white ones
programs, but will require a higher threshold of entry from those people who are not used to writing the way the industry has been used to for many years.
[61:35]
Look at the closing speech.
Yes, thank you. To everyone. Thank you. Pavlo and good evening, everyone.

=== ROW 281 | f015645 | https://youtube.com/watch?v=hm7HnPZEQWo | 2025-03-10 | youtube ===
[00:03]
So hi! Everyone again, I think we are ready to start now.
My name is Paul. I'm here to introduce our speaker, our speaker is Turkey Simonan coach, a chief technology officer of the 2 companies again, automation and outer Tech.
This company is the Shells in industrial automation solutions Sergei has been working in tech professionally since 90, 94, 1994.
You mean? It's 30 years of experience, almost so great.
She's main focus in automation of industrial processes.
He skilled in impressed number of fields, which include thrust, python, webassembly virtualization, server, hardware, Pcs.
Internet of scenes Cloud and Linux, Turkey. You'll talk about cross-platform desktop apps in Russ and Qt is a popular framework for creating graphical user interface.
[01:05]
And now before, Sergei takes the stage, I have to remind you that there is a Qa.
Button on the bottom of your screen, and you can open the Ki window and ask questions.
The whole talk, and we will. We will discuss those questions after the talk.
Thanks, and so we. Your stage is yours. Now.
So. Hello, everyone! My name is Sergey Simonanco, and unfortunately, my skills are unable to allow me to enable we doing zoom.
I wish I had one more to connect the camera.
Okay, it's working I mean yesterday, but no chance to to make it work today.
Okay, so first of all, let me express my gratitude to organizers of this event.
Just a my name is Sergei S. Manenka.
[02:07]
I have 30 years of experiencing it last 20 or so.
I live and work in the Czech Republic who doesn't know where it is?
It's a country around rock. So let's go with presentation.
I specialize in industrial automation. But I will talk about.
I gonna? Talk about interfaces. Why? Because it's very common question that people want to make some tiny.
The sub application for the software and they don't know which framework to choose.
Actually, why do we still write this top applications?
It's 2,020 free. There is no Http.
Sometimes. So you are talking with an industrial devices like classical databases, and maybe sort party web services.
The last case. Of course you can make an electron application. But it's not my way.
This, sometimes the top application are just fosters and web browser.
[03:15]
Sometime, right. They require more access to the local machines and Webassembly can provide.
And so the main. What is for me is no limitations.
You can just take your desktop created.
The can create and use that on desktop without any modifications.
So you can use multiple tracks. You can use Tokyo.
You can use any other. Us and Chronos runtime.
So actually development, it's much more faster.
You can create application with no HTML and Css.
Code, in and guys, my presentation.
They mentioned that some people just say hate HTML, so there's a bonus you choose a framework with not HTML, because sexual assistance now nowadays, maybe everywhere.
But taking accounts that users must download and install your application like physically, like a program so in my sector is not a problem, because people are used to use software from nineties so say download and install everything you tell them.
[04:28]
Without any problems, so let's go next. Why couldte for us to file?
I locked you to a lot about 20 years. There are actually 2 be grown up players from the market. Qt.
And gtk.
Sometimes. Can you hear me, guys? Sorry. Can I write some?
Yes, yes, it's fine.
Okay, because because someone is complaining his.
Thank you. So that, 2 big grown up players qt, and Gtk.
Except personal. I'm watching on all players like Eui and some so, and I hope with one day we'll start writing like solutions, safe desktop application, and ask.
But now there's a situation. It's like this.
Alternatives like, and so on. I don't too young or less focused on this top applications.
If you want to sell your application, or if you want to make a top and source.
[05:31]
But it sells your backend, and your application must look like high.
5 so qt. Usually looks neat and more enterprise ready, but actually taking accounts.
Their license. If you open source the application and use only open Source security confidence usually have no problems.
With that the May one of the main things perfectly works with 4 key screens could you absolutely, correctly works with their sizable windows this very important because some frameworks are wearing it until you start zoom in until you start resizing the windows Qta has got
commercial support, including lots of third party consulting companies.
So never be alone. Qt. Has got qt. Designer Qt.
Design studio, and 56 and Kml. Like, on markup language.
So you can choose either to do everything with mouse, or do we think?
[06:31]
And about question guys. Later, when I finish, okay and goody, 5 or qt, 6.
Now 55 nowadays, is still still popular because of the actually Kd.
The most well known open source player, and so, as they, slowly migrating to Qt.
6, and I believe in 2,024, when, like majority of Linux distribution, gonna be upgraded to new licenses, they will upgrade Qt.
To version 6. But now you got like in production people, you usually put version 5 is no problems.
Next. Sock your team rust. And they are like 3 big, well-known crates.
First one is retail. Is zoom. It has got the most direct buildings.
The next one is zoom at the object for us actually, if you met the object Rs, so it's more high level.
[07:38]
Create for Qt programming. And actually, when I started working with the objects was almost impossible to use.
So I will focus more on retail in this presentation, and the last one is 6, 60.
Maybe I'm wrong. But they started together with Zoom at the object, but after we decided to make on project.
So let's go next. Rustation should.
Now, and the interface basics you must learn about finance and slow.
This special mechanism of, or a data exchanging between, Qt.
Threats actually, Qt is very big ecosystem with with many stop.
But we will focus today only on interfaces, because I prefer doing everything in rust and to take only interface from Kuttin and doing some crazy mixes with this.
[08:42]
So there are no events in Russ like close events on windows, because there is no like classical OP.
So you must either use c plus plus wrappers, but, or in the majority of cases, you just don't need events.
Qtv. Because everything can be solved with it slots if you are right. Vi.
Jay for the fourth time. Avoid blocking their lives, threat with your heavy calculations, because it will be a login to your users will hate you if you are using Ross before.
Beware or auto drops of dynamic widgets by Rust.
If you create some, because when we just go out of visible sculptor like a cold sculpture, so must keep them somewhere, and c plus plus oh, sorry c plus plus knowledge can be bonus.
But it's not requirements personally about myself. I don't like C, plus plus I even hey, c plus plus.
But I I like could see, fortunately, is written in C, plus.
[09:44]
Okay, so sign on this is, what's a Z. I consider you can.
And like, imagine signals and slot like many to many channels, signals, and to final objects are not usually tried save.
But if you do, only emitted on sorry one moment.
Sorry I still have a cold, because my daughter goes to is going to school, and she is my personal.
Wire supplier. So I have called the whole winter so signals and slot you can move final to any threat and use emit function without any problems.
And usually people do like this. So you missed signals from other strategies.
And let's go next. And actually my days of love looks usually looks like the following like a single ui threat, and which send commands to workers.
[10:51]
And actually workers send back data. Let's speed up a little bit because we have limited in time.
So? Why do people still use 3 12 isn't all the same the most popular project, with no serious issues?
It has got the most complete buildings. It supports. Good designer forms.
Is supported with this it has got minimal rest of our hands, so if you have problems with it, goes to Google, you'll find the solution and you port it through always, almost no changes.
When Ray Telst''ll be with it.
You prefer to keep away from unsafe blocks in your caught sexually could use reason in C, plus plus unsafe somewhere in code, everywhere.
But other frameworks can hide this for you if you use cube.
Not only if you don't care about kitten knowledge base, if you need to.
This sixth support there is no retail, for could be 6 yet and here is a program example.
Let's go very quickly, so there is a program where a background walker increase control every second and pushes.
[11:58]
Actually, you can scan QR caught and look into source once the value is increased that they've been sent back to Ui threat.
At and us has got one reset button to reset this control.
They talk. We are standard draft channels, but worker threats use one empty like one null.
Could he sign out to notify Ui about new events in the this Ross channels?
So let's go to so we are creating channels.
So here, you see, we use unsafe synthes.
Center our emitter to another threat. So it's no problem to use, because it's officers shell cute today. So we construct Ui, we show it.
We sponsored our background background worker, executive application, and we quit.
So how does application look like usually? Is this ui form is actually retail alright? Well, it's good.
[13:07]
Where are you, tiny rascal? Written? But it does some interesting things like it cannot ui form for you, so as objects has only widgets itself counter, and one button to reset there is a struct for maintenance with window and actually today to
channels. And we can implement starting upcasting for our window to let Retail, make, slot for us automatically.
Otherwise we need to declare them as ras lodgers manually so let's go next.
If here is your implementation we create, you are on your object.
We lot everything. And we assign a this system unsafe, unsafe, unsafe assign our reset handler.
It's automatically met with a slot. No arguments from a rust function converted into CD slot by retail.
[14:08]
So let's go next. Here is an alternative slot implementation.
So you can just make it closure. You can put your cut and to have no agreement and have not even static capacity.
The player. And actually why Celsius, under R. C.
Counter, because in if in the closure you want to address yourself, you need to clone it.
But it's a single ui has got a single chat only so you can use or reference, count or not atomic.
So let's go next. Here is the worker, which actually increases listens to channels and send the data.
And after the data is sent and everything is okay as a data signal is submitted with empty events and how to handle data in Ui.
So we assign a simple function to this sign-on which is triggered one final is actually missing.
But after we use draft channels we are your full interactions.
[15:08]
Later on, and actually and toss our events and display.
What shall we do? So the last topic I want to mention how to distribute application.
We have cool create cargo, bunnel, which can do I don't know about Rpms, but they be on packages, of course, for Linux and also packages for always 6, and we have 5 before I car go weeks.
It's been in 4, and popular windows. Installation, framework.
So we can do everything directly from cargo. So thank you for watching.
You can download presentation, you can actually look at production application example, because actually, we use with our production application for our scanner platform.
Next time I will probably make a presentation about the platform. Okay?
[16:11]
Hello! Thank you. Thank you. It's fine.
So let's go to a question. Sorry it was a little bit longer than expected. Okay.
I think we have plenty of time for questions.
Okay, if someone want to see me, you can do it in record.
Because camera was working perfectly.
Oh, well, I'm not sure if that was recorded.
But never mind, so I'll go over the questions in most likely it's a most avoids fashion.
So first question is, did you conside or evaluate Gtk?
What made you pick? Qt. You probably understand that a bit in the presentation, but if you want to add something or make a short summary, you can.
Yeah, yeah, actually, I think it's worth.
I don't fly gtk so much when I started using Linux I switched to Kitty at Star, but now I use I-three.
So it has got like no framework, no dedicated framework.
[17:13]
And actually the second problem just because we either sell our applications or this application sell.
Other application, even they are open source. So we need to present enterprise customers.
The most I create the most neat interface I can have, and Whisko T.
Is early possible. So you can just close the source. You can paste some fee for commercial components.
It's or you can keep everything open. Source. But it's still.
Looks, very good, but actually is a hole of wire.
Why do you use whim? But not emacs? Why do you use like vice versa?
Just because I respect you, K. But I don't use it.
Sure, it's yeah, like you are. The speaker.
So we are asking your profile, yeah.
Yeah.
So next question is not exactly. Oh, well, it's a bit about so using.
[18:14]
Taui. I have a problem with transferring a lot of bytes between back end and front end, due to serialization. And this realization for transfer does Qt have these or the same problem.
I'm not sure about. If you wrap over some the objects, because it should be very little overhead, but like high level frameworks I mentioned, they offer you to use side of the system as it's but if you use rough signals, of course you can transfer everything you
are not limited to anything to transfer, so I.
Yeah, but I think Kt. Doesn't have the serialization part right?
So it operates.
No, no, no, there is no, unless you connect like your interface, written, and c plus plus as library.
So you need to kind of civilization, or like a stable Abi, to exchange data between.
Yeah, it's more like F 5, or functioning interface and centralization. I think right?
[19:14]
Yeah, yeah, actually, if you care about stable Abi, I have an experience.
We had like tried to exchange structural.
So it's a shared libraries. But we found message package fast enough in most cases, so don't wouldn't be afraid to.
Yeah, yeah, for Katie. You don't need any serialization.
Yeah, I think I think I think they have asked, because stories has some interest.
So next question is also about do you think power will replace electron on a market this time?
You don't need.
Oh, okay, okay, guys. At first, I'm.
The second.
I mean in feature, and and yeah, the second part of this question, which are the common cases for Qt.
Best cases for dowry. So a user asks for comparison.
Oh, yeah, sorry for Bacon, because I can't just answer on this question, because I'm not ui expert.
[20:33]
Okay.
The only electron I use is our studio is a Id for our language. And this is all I know about about electron, I never used to electronic production.
Yeah. So the next question is comparison with the Bassembly. You said that sometimes the top upsts require more access to the local machines and Webassembly, in which way raft can provide more access to the local machines.
Actually, it's a native application. You can write files, you can format your drive, you can.
I don't know. You can blow up your computer use SDK for that.
So you have no limitations. Just what operating system allows you.
So it's very.
Yeah, so given some big growth, yeah, I can add some ground for we Bostonly by itself doesn't have any system interface.
And if you want some server, for example, yc, which is by simply system interface, basically can handle files. And that's it.
And a little bit networking code, but even not the homeless.
[21:47]
Let's.
So let's go next. Actually, what I want to add, because usually we do, we do programs which communicate with USB a lot with non non standard protocols which communicate to several ports.
And you just have not alternatives.
Yeah, that makes sense. So next question is more close to Kt, why is there so many unsafe locks?
Who could say, do you opt in some more safe upstructions?
Yes, it can be wrapped and actually high level frameworks allowed you to hide everything in the background.
But keep in mind that are still unsafe blocks, actually like computer sounds like computers are unsafe somewhere near the processor is always an unsafe block.
Victoria.
Yeah, we know that, but, like everyone in rust, will don't want to write on. Say, walk in their day-to-day.
Yeah, I understand. I understand. I understand. But you have to.
Alternatives either use high level frameworks like you met the object, but you are limited in something, or you use directions, but sometimes you deal with on safe code.
[22:59]
Can you also show some slide with unsafe quote and comment like, why is it needed?
Yeah, yeah, it's very, actually, unsafe course are everywhere with method.
Let me are calling retail methods. There is no unsafe code like.
Like the.
So? Is there something like, Can you have connects here like these are a retail method.
Connect rather than oh!
You know, retail is automatic blending generator, because is there now a function?
Almost no function written in by hands. It's like similar.
With Amazon does for the Api, and so so you can't demand from people to who generated your billions for thousands of classes to make safe rapport.
You can do it actually by your own, if you need.
[24:01]
But look, I'm true like how what in this piece of code is unsafe and like how to make it safe.
Connect, connect, function is like native to the function is onsafe.
Okay.
So if you call external function in a strong library, it's considered to be uncertain by default, so we can make, of course, some wrap around.
If you'd like, use typical functions because because it could use a huge ecosystem, you use the power of it.
Someone uses another part of it. It's you can even I don't understand each other, because the next question I see How do you do work rounds continue not existing.
Our handling guys. I never like errors.
Non existent 50&nbsp;h. I'm not sure what you are talking now.
Okay, I have to say everyone is free to see the the next room, which is going to start soon.
[25:07]
There will be Andre secure call talking about using the bus and bleeds and backend. But you are also free to stay here for as long as Sergey is willing to answer questions.
Less. Thank you. Yeah, thank you for watching and let Uss at last finished with questions.
So about non-existent error handling actually actually been in their return kinds of hours, I believe, I believe, because I never had problems with that next.
What do you prefer to throw the alternatives like Tower Eagle, and so on.
Actually, actually, I'm wishing Iguya a lot, and I believe one day it will replace, like all and say frameworks.
But now like it doesn't looks like, because for a quarter there is a big benefit. It's safe.
It's written in Austin's, written by you like it's.
It's very good, but for users, user need to see forest.
[26:10]
What is used to see, and after a second something very needed, accurate, like, not made so quickly and by hands.
So let's go next our other popular project with open source.
We'll build this Qt. And Ross, actually, you can.
Oh, let's make a bit more yeah, so you can answer the expression.
If you have time, if you have time.
But yeah, we have time. I have just said, everyone who wants to be on the next talk, like, if they can already switch.
But we are here for half an hour at least, without issues.
Okay, okay, no. Problem. So let's go to next, we help Median core.
I can read it manually.
Yup, no, you stop it on other any popular projects is open source.
Yeah, yeah.
[27:11]
Yeah. The open source buildings.
So actually, you can, you can look in our application as oppressive.
Speak, spread a huge and sexual, over, written by maximum.
One and half people me into one. My colleague, and actually, it's really big, and it has got lots of interest in things like many non model windows.
So it keeps like normal windows and rask collection.
And actually, when we started to rise this application, we didn't know about trick with sign off a slot, and we used there is a more safe alternative you can use, but it's less faster. It's slower.
You can use Q-timer and the you could just react like 10 times a second to events.
It's usually enough for this top application unless you are writing some first personal shooter game.
But usually it's good. So you can just make a scheduler and toss your queue with events like 10 times a second.
[28:17]
So let's go next.
Yeah. The next question is, could rust and be built for Android?
If yes. Do you know an example?
No, no! Sorry I missed about the since the portal. I want to answer this.
Oh, sorry. Yeah.
Yeah, yeah, actually, where are very good question, because because in Katie you don't need to have a something, because there is no like real I/O Coo.
This threat is like, leaves, its own life.
It outputs everything on the screen. But in the background you can have Tokyo.
You can like. You can have everything guessing can exchange data is as a honest way.
And you can actually use a sync channels with a cross channels with a Ct threat is absolutely no problem to use.
[29:17]
Sounds good, so the next one could rust and kt are be built for Android. And if yes, do you know an example?
Yes, but for Android, actually, you need to. I will choose another frame, because lots of framework more safe and more android dedicated because don't actually don't try to make your application worse.
Hotel, because you'll get instead of 3 good applications.
You'll get one best versatile application. Because any like user application is also contains 2 powers, forces, backend, which talks with server backend, and actually hands the logic, and the next one is front, end which is displayed to user so you can have the same
backend, but different front tens and have everything upgrade. Like to provide big tables for desktop users and small button as small tables and big buttons for mobile users and users will yeah, love you.
[30:28]
Do you think? Do you know something in rust that is good for Mobile?
I know, on the flatter, and because Flatter was born to do mobile.
But I have no experience with that, because usually mobile application for mobile applications.
We use either like native languages, like or just web.
Yes.
Okay? So you already answered the question about our hands. I guess right.
Do we get to try? It assembles a bit. Elm like architecture, with comments and ui threats rendering data.
Actually, if we talk it about Qt, in general, it's a very big ecosystem which has got wrappers around system threats, wrappers around.
I'm not sure but maybe about around Filesystem.
So it was designed in days when, as it was only Java, so I'm alternative.
[31:33]
And was designed to make like applications which are not related to Java work, form machines to make them faster like they were compat toors in the sector of global cross-platform applications.
So Katie is very big ecosystem.
You don't write in good to you right like, in very modified c plus plus there's a lot of libraries, and so on.
So!
Yeah, they probably mean, like, when you are writing a kitchen, you probably don't use Qt threats and other stuff right?
Yeah. Yeah. Yes. Yes. Yes. Actually, what I want to say.
You have only one threat, because from you need only interface.
You don't need like. They local trace, or even they it's only sometimes a sign of to admit.
Tell your ui threat to display something actually just to my question, because, you guys, someone is asking to clarify to error handling question when you use Ct, just for interface, you get rid of 90% of errors we go use as much rust as
[32:52]
possible, and everything will be much better. So let's go next, please.
Kiki has its own types and strings. Y.
Ikti didn't have its own language. Well, this is very philosophical question.
The bigger because I am not jet brains.
They are not so ambitious. Then Brace will invite stream type and to make 2 languages instantly.
But it is a like, have they have actually not stable business, because changing to see us boards of directors.
And actually, people believe qt. 6 will be the last version of but actually.
Everyone wants everything busy. The last version in sense. You don't want to change everything in your programs.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, but but but never actually, this is a session. It's very similar to Java, because Java is that for 15 years.
But Java Cora still have lots of jobs. I don't think I don't even remember about cost, because in the you can make me loans nowadays, but it's complicated.
[34:06]
Oh, yeah, I think we have covered all the questions.
Yeah.
Okay, thank you. Everyone. Thank you for watching me. And let's go to other presentation, because everything is very interesting.
On the seventh. Thank you again, organizers, and sorry for my video.
Actually, we had a record in Wednesday, and I mean that recording was video.
But because my camera was working, okay.
Hey? Okay, yeah. Thank you. All. See you on the next talks.
So thank you. Goodbye.

=== ROW 282 | f015647 | https://youtube.com/watch?v=GSAFsZ-CJUg | 2025-03-28 | youtube ===
[00:00]
Hello friends! This last speech will also be in Ukrainian language.
For foreigners, use
titles, they can be turned on and see
live translation.
I'm pleased to introduce our latest for today
speaker - Pavlo Myroniuk. Pavlo works as a
Rust-developer for three years.
He is mainly engaged in system development. During working hours
Pavel is engaged in the implementation of authentication protocols
and various network protocols, and free from work
time is an important part of our admin team
and Rust-evangelicals.
Pavlo is also a mentor on
RustCamp. For those who haven't heard of RustCamp, it's an intensive
The bootcamp that we host,
[01:04]
Ukrainian Rust community, twice a year
to prepare participants for professional development
on Rust. We've already done a few iterations
and Pavlo participated in each iteration,
starting with the first one. Pavlo is also involved in sports
And, for those who are interested, he can catch up
30 times without a break.
Paul's speech on FFI,
namely using Rust to replace a library,
written in C++, its own implementation.
The difficulties that Pavlo faced,
in a commercial project. Here
As far as I understand, they became part of the
Pavlo's speech and I hope
The speech will be interesting and useful to you.
[02:06]
I ask you to welcome Pavel on stage.
Hello everyone. Can you, please,
Allow screen sharing?
It's off.
Ahh, that's for coordinators.
Wait a minute, let's figure it out now.
Oh, I can.
And yes, it should be visible now. Think
You're good to go. Hello everyone.
As Kostya has already said,
my talk today will be about integrating Rust into
other systems.
A very common case will be the case
when we replace some
C++ or there is an investigative library for a library,
[03:09]
written in Rasti and so on. Before
as we get to the main material,
A little about me. Kostya has already said a lot about me.
Let's summarize a little again. I am once
He has been a developer for about three years. I work for a company
Apriorides. You've already heard what I do.
Additionally, I can also say that I have
have my own blog where I write articles and
telegram in the channel. Telegram channel.
And yes, now let's move on, actually,
to the essence of my report. For starters,
I think we need to explain the situation, because it's not entirely clear
what it means to replace a library.
Roughly it looks like this.
We have some kind of operating system or
[04:12]
We have some kind of program. And in this program
There's a certain API there,
obviously the API through which
This program knows how to ship
different libraries and then
use them. That is, it can be any
extension to the program,
It can be any other extension by type
authorization protocol or some codec there,
or any other functionality.
Take FreeRDP as an example.
For those who don't know,
FreeRDP це є open
source implementation of the RDP protocol.
The RDP protocol has been around for a very long time
It is in every Microsoft.
[05:12]
Windows car. It is used for
dedicated access to other machines.
The whole point is that this
FreeRDP in it
there is a parameter that is responsible for SSPI
Module. I don't need to know what SSPI is, but I
Let me briefly explain what this module does.
SSPI module, it generally corresponds to
for how exactly the authorization to
remote machine. at RDP
it enables us to use our own
module for authorization. And it's easy
It can be assumed that we have a quite possible situation,
when we want to write our own implementation
of some kind of authorization protocol for the RAST and to prosecute it
[06:13]
in this priority.
We write on C++
We don't want to, because it's a lot of difficulties, a lot of bugs,
That's why we decide to write this
library on RAST and the whole
My next talk will be about
How do we best write this library
for once? How Can We Avoid Big Ones?
errors and bugs? And what you should pay attention to
Attention? And how can we better improve our
Codes? So, based on our task,
that we've just discussed, we have certain
constraints, that is, the rules that we have to follow.
The first is API we have it defined,
We can't change it, because if
[07:13]
We'll go back to the previous example,
SSPI –
This is the API that it was developed Microsoft
many years ago, he has support in
many programs, many have already implemented it,
And we can't just go to the same end
say, change us API 15 so that we have
to implement it. That is, API
We already have it defined, we can't change it, and we have to
adjust to it.
And then, since we have API defined, we
There is a salt headers file, and the last one,
we want to write everything entirely in Rust.
I think it's pretty clear and obvious,
What if we want to write a dialect
on Rust, we need to write FFI. And immediately
[08:16]
we can set a lot of different utilities there, which are
in the Rust ecosystem for writing FFI, but we
Now let's briefly go through the most popular of them and see
why in general they don't fit or fit
Only partially for our task.
The first of these is
CByteGen. What is its essence? It is passed
according to your rast code. He's waiting
all major exports, such as Yactu,
YactuzLive, Pub, XRDFN, and so on. And for these higher exports,
It generates headers file for
tamsi or C++ program,
who is going to use this raster
code. In us, the task of the troshka is protillezhny,
Because we already have headers
file, and we need to write our
[09:17]
(a) To the extent permitted by the provisions of this Convention, the Secretary-General of the That is, in
The situation is reversed as in this diagram.
But, wait a minute, I'll interrupt you, please check that in
You have subtitles in Ukrainian, they are poorly generated.
Per second. Oh, now, for sure, for some reason it strayed into
English back. Now there should be Ukrainian ones. Yes, there it is
Something was bad. Thanks. Okay, I mean, I'll sum it up again
this slide. In,
in, instrument, see, beingen, it doesn't suit us
the reason that our situation is reversed. That is, we already have
There is a fresh header file, and we need
Write a racial implementation for it.
Let's move on. Bindgen. There's more to it
One Tula. It's more like one
which is suitable for our task.
[10:20]
This tula, having a certain H-file sishn,
On it, it can generate
RAS EFFI bandits. That is,
As here on the slide, the code on top,
We had sit definishers
structure and function, and bottom at the output
we have RAS equivalents. But the problem is
because, first of all, this tula is designed to
That then these sit bunnings that were generated,
They were used to
to then blinker them
there I associated it with the system implementation and so on
its from RASTA to call the sish code. We're here,
In our task, the situation is different, because we
the following RASTA are required
[11:23]
And we have these features, and we have these features,
And we have these features, and we have these features, and we have these
functions and we have these features and we have these features and we have these features
functions, and we have these features, and we have these features,
And we have these features, and we have these features, and we have
these functions, the code it generates,
Extract Function Headers
and then reuse them in our real-world implementation.
So we move on to the next CXX tool.
In fact, its most important application
This is the secure binding of C++
and RASTA. That is, if we have a situation
when we want to cause C++
code from RASTA or vice versa,
then it's worth paying attention to this
[12:24]
tool. In fact, from this we can already say that it is
It doesn't suit us, but it's better to figure it out,
how it works to know for sure that it won't fit.
Essentially, CSX works like this
in the same way that we
Writing Header Saves
walkie-talkies and then under the hood
all that FFI is generated,
we don't have any access to it there and
it's made in such a way that we just call
function and the way where it is
are safe, although under the hood there
from the headphones the generated FFI is used.
In this case, if we want to
from Rasta to call C++ code,
then macros from this tool
[13:28]
generate a bug for this, and therefore
that's where the New Block feature comes
Store Client it's just called,
as where is this function, although in fact under the
hood will be generated and summoned
bindings, which will then trigger these
Plush realization.
That's how it works. If we have the opposite,
We want to use this plus or plus to call
RAS codes, we have in the externRAS block
write our headlines for
types and functions, then implement them outside this block,
and then, again, at compile time
[14:28]
This Tula, she'll generate it for us, she'll
we will generate rast and c++
Baiding and then with C++
It will be possible to calmly call all the
these features. It's all done in such a way that
so that the user has
or less access to the FFA and to
the more code generated and for it to be, the more secure.
In general, it looks cool, but the context
of this problem that we are trying to solve, it does not fit,
Because, as I said before,
We have API defined, we have it
We can't change it and we have to adapt to it.
And so the only and only solution,
What we have is writing bindings
Hands. Here, for example,
[15:32]
A typical example of a function that would be
in our FFI. It has a secant
header, then it has rack conversions
structures in Rust and vice versa,
and it has calls to Save
Rust Implementation. And in general
it doesn't look like
difficult, in principle, it can be done with your hands quite
write quickly, however, if we take real
API, they have a lot of methods,
they have complex behavior,
There are a lot of edge cases
and so on. And it would seem that our simple function,
in which there's just a transformation of different
structures from one to another, in fact it is very strong
Parting, becoming too much
[16:34]
different places where we can do
A lot of mistakes. And this code that you see on the slide
It is illustrative or not necessary to read. It's just there to
so that you can see
what sizes can
reach such unsafe functions. This code,
it is extracted from
a real library that implements
SSPI. That is, the number of
The unsafe code we have is very, very much increasing.
And now we move on to the second one...
Part of my report is about how we can protect ourselves
from mistakes in our outsider and for more
It's worth paying attention to. And let's get started
From that simpler, there are types. Obviously
that if we write the types incorrectly, we'll have
[17:34]
problems and so on. In general, yes, but the big difficulty is
that in this case these types they are nothing
Checked. The most we can do is we can generate
but from the headphones there are a lot of places where we can do
Error. And even the wrong numeric type,
He can obey us in this way and so on.
If you implement any bug,
Popular API
or some big API,
who has a lot of cross-outs, then perhaps under him already
There are bugs there and you can resist
in existing loans and from them to save up there
certain headlines. Basically, it works
and it can often help.
[18:37]
Then the next breed, no matter what you write,
whether you're integrating your
your own library, or you're just writing baning,
then you wear the types in separate crates,
so that they can be reused later. The bottom line is,
that all the types that are, for example, in the crate Windows
Sys, they can't be reused somewhere.
That is, if we want to Windows
use some structures from the Sys Windows,
then we will not be able to do this. It's simple there
There will be no imports.
The next thing we're going to talk about, of course, is memory.
The api you are implementing, or the api under which you
adjust, it can be quite difficult
with difficult behaviour and in spite of this,
[19:39]
You must follow it completely. Because
You never know exactly how your library
will be used and better done
Everything is as it says in the documentation. Because sometimes
There can be a lot of problems. That is, if in
documentation says,
that a certain operation must take place in place,
i.e. overwrite existing data, then we
That's exactly what we should do. We don't have
create any new buffers, we don't have to assign
pointers to these new buffers, and so on. That is, completely
We follow the documentation. Because if you take
An example from my experience, we had such a joke at work,
that the documentation said,
that the decryption function is happening
[20:40]
in place, i.e. decrypted data,
they have to overwrite the previous cipher,
But we decided not to worry
We were just highlighting
a new buffer, replaced the pointers and so turned to the user.
Basically, it's the user who worked
I read the data on our new indicator and so on
next. Everything was great, but the problem was
was that each of our new warrior buffers, he created
memory leak and user,
He didn't expect us to allocate new memory and so
He did not purify it and thus in us
There's been there for more than a year, maybe even more,
Був memory leak.
The next thing we're going to talk about is UB, but before that,
[21:41]
how we're going to talk about UB cases,
It is worth recalling what it is. UB –
This is what it means from English undefined behavior, it means undefined
behavior. That is, UB –
This is a code for which we have no guarantee at all
on its implementation. That is, UB is non-deterministic
code. That is, we don't have a guarantee there,
what we will get as a result. Maybe it's
will be what we expect, maybe it won't be what
what we expect, or maybe it's in
any condition will break. That is, UBs are the following
places of entrances that
We must not, if possible, allow
which need to be cut and so on. And going over
from this to the topic of allocations. Maybe it's not
[22:42]
quite an obvious point, but RAS and C
They have separate allocators. And even if there is a high or
C++ code
uses our liba, then our
lib and that system code, it will have different
allocators. And that's why it's always worth considering
that if we are in the
if some memory is allocated, then the raster code has this memory
Clear. The same as before si. If the sish
code, i.e. the user's code highlighted some
memory, then only he has this memory with That is,
For example, if you look at the left-hand code,
then we see here that the memory
by 5 bytes, it was allocated by the RST code,
And we're trying to do it right away
[23:43]
Clean it with a sissy delocator.
This is wrong, it cannot be done, and we have it at once
UB. As well as the Dock Guide, he is
the same, but reversed. Here we have highlighted the memory
allocator, but we are trying to clear the
one-time allocator. Again, this is UB.
And there are no options where exactly UB can happen to us,
There are a lot of them, an awful lot of them, there in Raster
Reference is a very large list, you can read it, it doesn't make sense now
retell, but how to
It is we who can check the code with some utilities,
so that we can somehow
protect against Undefined Behavior?
And a utility that I recommend to everyone
to use, we have integrated it into our projects and
[24:43]
so on, it's Miri. Miri is an interpreter
For Summary Representation
raster code and miri goes through
according to your code, it looks at what operations you are there
use and if there is a memory leak
or there's UB and so on, Miri will see it for
example, if we take primitive code
which obviously makes a memory leak that is, we highlight
buffer on the 4th and then we don't
Clean. So if we run it under measure, then it
will find a memorelic with us
16 bytes, will show where we had
(a) To the extent permitted by the provisions of this Convention, the Secretary-General of the Council of Europe shall be entitled to submit to the Secretary-General of the Council of Europe, the Secretary-
It was in the test that it happened.
Pretty cool and very informative.
[25:45]
Or if we take the code you saw before
on the slide about allocators, it's
is the same code in which we allocate memory
and try to remove it with a seed.
And if we run it and drive it away
Through the faith, we shall see,
that Miri will find UB, tell us we don't
We can delete part of the
Rastov only through the secant delocator.
Will show us the place in which we are trying to do it.
Pretty cool too.
And if we've already started talking
about Miri, then every instrument, it's limited by something
And it has its own specifics. Like me
already said, Miri is an interpreter of the intermediate representation
RAS code, then Miri, it can execute
[26:48]
RAS code only. It can't execute C-code there,
He doesn't know how to go on Bindings and so on.
That is, if somewhere in your code there is a system
challenge, then most likely Miri will not be able to complete it.
Like, recently we were at work
forced to change the code because we have one of the
tests there was a system call there to get
host the name of the machine, and because of this, Miri could not
code execute. So I had to rewrite it a little.
Next, Miri can't guarantee that you have at all
there are no UBs in the program. Because
Miri, it only launches
those scenarios,
which we fed him. That is, there are tests, or there is just to run the program,
[27:49]
merge some instances, and so on. And further in moderation,
Since he is an interpreter, on very large tests,
on very difficult tests, where you want any generation,
for example, generating RSA keys there
some big ones, then with such examples it can
be slow. And that's it.
Thank you for your attention. You can ask questions.
Thank you, Paul. I don't know if I've paid
in the chat because I didn't set a timer, but I hope so. I'm not worried,
Everything is fine.
I have a few questions.
Interesting report, thank you for the report.
First question.
Cargo Careful. How does it work under the hood?
Can you explain? No
[28:51]
and not much, because I didn't use it.
Well like, I can tell you what I saw in the red place
in them, but I won't say because I didn't use it.
Ok. Valgrind. We have it
used some time before we found out
about Miri. What's the catch, how did we use it?
We wrote a separate program,
That is, some kind of binary
the file that loaded our DLL in the welts,
which we have written so far, then there I called from it
all sorts of functions, there were different scenarios, and so on.
And then we do this binary test
launched under Valgrind
And we looked to see if there would be any problems or not.
Whether it will find something or not. In fact, it wasn't very comfortable,
but at least it worked and if
[29:54]
There was a memory leak there different, so we saw it.
Thank you, Paul. And the next question.
In addition to C and C++, FFI integration
what codebases have you come across,
With what integration? And maybe,
Jun. Basically, if you write
The FFI we've been talking about is essentially
anyone who knows how to work with C
ABI, which is in fact almost all languages,
then they will be able to use your library.
Practically, what else I have encountered is
Baids under C-Sharp.
Again, they were made there
January experts from our
code, and then the code was written separately
[30:55]
on C Sharp, which wrapped
all the January calls so that they are not visible.
I know
that the library we write,
It is also used on Android,
But we don't support android itself
And they didn't write for it. We know that there are people who have it there
Use.
Have you heard anything about integration with the ZIK programming language?
I don't know if there's...
Automatic Tools
for Zika that they generated bindings, but like
from Zika you can definitely download
[31:55]
or the type above it to call functions.
Again, this will be through sine exports and sine
ABI.
Ok.
Paul, please check the chat, and the next question.
Is it worth using Valgrind in a project,
which has only an increase in dependence,
Is it sufficient in such cases?
a secant code that you can't abstract in any way,
That is, you have it anyway
must be performed. For example, you use
CreateOpenSSL, which in turn has there in any
January challenges. In that case, you won't be able to
use Miri and you have to take
other tules and it will be, for example,
[32:58]
Valgrind. If you don't have any
such restrictions, the measure should be sufficient and
measure will even be better, because Tom
that Miri, it's specially sharpened
under RAFT, it specifically knows how to check a lot of
various jokes related to RAFT. There
for example, Stacked Borrows,
if you've heard of them. Therefore, if you can in
Miri, the better it is in Miri. If not, you'll have to
take something else. 'Cause if you go back to this slide,
then Miri has its limitation.
Yes, thank you.
Check, please, chat. Lots to serve
і пам'ятацій в раз. Ні-ні-ні-ні.
It's not? Chat, chat, just watch the chat.
[33:59]
There's a question about... No, no, there are no questions, there is a request.
Query? Yes.
We can say
yes? You must be
Didn't find the chat. I really have
Q&amp;A. Close the Q&amp;A, please, and open the chat.
There is a request there. Per second.
Ah, I get it. Thanks. And one more thing,
at least one question. Is there a
There is already some convenient way to implement ready-made C interfaces
like Bindgen for further implementation in Rust?
Well, Bindgen is the closest thing to
that we have. I haven't seen anything better.
Yes. And there was more
[35:01]
The question, also a little vague,
Could you summarize
How are such issues resolved? Is it correct
To say that such problems are solved manually?
Yes, such problems can be solved
manually and then covered by tests,
linters, miria, and so on.
Thank you, Pavlo.
Looks like that's it. No more questions.
Pavlo, thank you for the report. Just a minute
don't leave Pavlo and me.
Let me make a closing.
Paul, I think we can hide your presentation.
[36:12]
Short closing.
That's where the conference happened
UARUST Conference
2024. I hope we will have
the opportunity to repeat it next year.
So far, we have collected a little more than four thousand,
However, it is possible that this figure will increase even more, since already
After the conference, they also usually buy additional tickets to get
entry. If you
know who will be interested, please share
link to the conference website with your friends.
Like I said, it's all made possible
thanks to the community.
About fifty people are involved in the organization process
[37:12]
of this conference.
And another 16 people for
within the community, the world leaders who have agreed,
world experts who agreed to take part in our conference.
By the way, some of these speakers are also
will be present at Rust-Conf, which will be
to be held in September in Canada.
Let me remind you about our sponsors. It's NIR, Kumeka Team,
Bohemia Automation, Outbox Systems.
And the only one
The remaining part is autoparties.
The autoparty will take place in Kyiv, there are already a lot of
people in there and in Berlin as well
Not enough people gathered in Lviv,
[38:12]
therefore, there will be autofalls only in Berlin and Kyiv.
And if you're not already in
community, are not in our main chat,
then please join us, there you can follow the latest
news, the events we organize
for the organization of a bootcamp, in which,
By the way, yes, Pavlo also participates as a mentor every time.
And also
I want to thank you for taking part in this,
We bought a ticket, all the funds that we will raise
from the tickets, will be transferred, or rather already transferred
to the Come Back Alive Foundation, which I hope will also help a little
to our Armed Forces in the attack
orcs on us.
Thank you all for participating. Thank you Pavlo.
[39:12]
Have a nice after party.

=== ROW 283 | f015648 | https://youtube.com/watch?v=aHez0Uz-NRU | 2025-04-11 | youtube ===
[00:01]
I'm going to invite the second speaker,
the first English speaking speaker. But before
I want to say that if you are ukrainian
and you would like have ukrainian subtitles,
you have. You can. There is button on the bottom.
Show captions. You can have titles in Ukrainian.
And also if you are English speaking participant,
you can have captions in
English. There are few ukrainian speakers.
If you don't understand Ukrainian, you can use captions.
It's my great pleasure to introduce to you remarkable
speaker who has made significant sight in
the rust programming community. Please join
me in welcoming Mace Hirsch
Mache began his journey with Rust
[01:02]
back in 2016 and
quickly transitioning to working with its professional
in 2017 at parity technology.
Signed the time he has amazed
wealth of experience knowledge contributing greatly to
the field. Nowadays, Maciej divides his
time between his own open source projects,
painting, tabletop games
and managing the lively activity
of his five cats.
Today, Macei will present a talk
titled tokens all the way down.
In his talk, he will greet us through the basics of
Lexingen and then demonstrate series
optimization technique to
a simple lexer example who
don't know. Lexing is part of this
[02:04]
long parsing and compiling tool
change. The first stage.
Whether your keen interest
is in the domain, it will be
useful to you because it is not only
about laxing, but also about optimization.
Okay, without further ado, please join me in giving a warm
welcome to Macei Macej. Please let
me share the slideshow.
There we go. That should work. Okay, cool. So, hi, I'm Mace.
As already said,
welcome to talk. The talk is tokens all the way down. How to pass strings
to tokens at roughly 1gb/second or gigabyte per
second, as already said.
[03:05]
Yeah, I've been. I started with my learning rs in like 2016. So it's
like at the very closely after the release of 1.0.
So early times before, like a lot of nice
things landed, like lexical lifetimes and
stuff. Like as annoying as borough tracker is now,
it was way more annoying in the past and then professionally
started working in rust at party at the beginning of 2017.
I'm the author of Logos, Cobalt and armholes. Those are
like main operations products that they all need some
love now. But you
can also ask me anything about proc macros because it turns out,
like pretty much everything I do, I just use proc macros because
they like it, because, I don't know, it's difficult to tickles
my brain. You don't have to worry though. This talk is not about proc
markers, but just I have
a website, I have an email, I have a GitHub. I'm not on social media
necessarily because I'm older and not cool and I don't have
[04:08]
time to argue with strangers. So this
talk is logos adjacent, and I will briefly
explain it. So back when I was still running rust, I wanted to
make a JavaScript transpiler because
that sounds like a simple, easy product for one person to do.
And I was still working with JavaScript, and I was annoyed by
compile time with JavaScript bubble and stuff.
So it was okay, well, to make a transpiler I need to write a parser.
Make a parser, I need to write a lecture. So I wrote a lexer.
And once you write something in rust,
you can play this fun game where you start benchmarking your code and seeing performance
improve over time.
And I got the likes eventually to the performance I wanted to
have, but I ended up with very
verbose code that was kind of hard to maintain. I didn't necessarily have
to maintain it because like those could change this every two months,
three months or something. But I figured,
[05:09]
okay, I can learn proc markers and I
can try to separate the structure of how
the lecture is built into its own code
generation and only have the definitions of the tokens defined
in the code of my Alexa. So that's how Logos was
born. So Logos is basically what
Logos is. Logos is not Alexa, Logos is Alexa generator. So it's
basically a glorified proc marker that takes like a definition like this on
the screen. Now where you write your
token definitions as a simple enum and
you give, you define the tokens as either
like simple strings, or you can use the regular expression syntax
to define, okay, the text is like lowercase trapper case letters
and plus between. One or more important
note on logos, logos doesn't use the regular expression engine,
[06:10]
it only uses regular expressions syntax. So there
are some limitations on like backtracking and stuff if you ever like decide to use
logos. But that's necessarily what this talk is about.
So I'm going to talk about some optimizations I've learned while I
was working in logos and as some other projects.
And lexing is a pretty niche domain.
Not everyone needs to write lexer,
but the optimizations themselves are, I think are pretty broadly
applied. Whenever you deal with parsing
text. Or I even like browsing like binary code or if
you want like yeah, do some bytecodes or something, like all
of the stuff in stock is like applicable. So if I do my
job right, you'll have learned something here. So no matter what level you are,
hopefully very briefly,
what is lexing. So if you have like some
inputs, like, so we can assume
this kind of example, like, okay, I want to like parse some
[07:11]
source control over programming language of some kind. So this is like a simple
hello function from JavaScript. I want to
do something with this JavaScript code, and the first thing you probably want to
do is to change the
input from a stream of bytes or characters
for the text into a stream of tokens, which would look something like this.
You want to divide the source code into individual tokens
and you want to differentiate between tokens.
So you want to know that, okay, function and hello,
they're both like for us, like humans, they're words, right?
But for the purpose of the language, they actually different
things. Like the function is a function keyword, it's a different entity,
versus hello is just like identifier, which is like, you know,
any word that's not a keyword.
And then like all the parentheses and brackets and computation
[08:11]
and stuff like you want those to be spread to documents. That's roughly
what lecture does, right? White mothers.
So lecture is basically like a first step pre parser
that you want to build into your like full parser.
Let's split the source codes into tokens, or we also call them lexims
sometimes why
you do this is because it makes it much easier to then
create a parser that parses the entire source code into abstract.
I'm not going to talk about some abstraction text tree, but if you
want to look into further into parsers and all this
stuff, if you just search abstract syntax tree, then it's going to give you a
lot of information on how to do stuff. All compilers,
all ids, pretty much all enters, all of them operate in asDs,
and all of them at some point probably use lexers,
because you don't necessarily
need alexer if you want to write a parser. And if you
[09:11]
have a simple enough problem, if you want parentheses like JSON,
you probably can go straight from JSON to JSON
text to a tree without the Lexus step.
But for anything complex enough like a programming language, you probably want to have a
lecture. Because even though Lexer is tiny bit of a performance
cost, dividing your parsing to the next thing
step and a parsing step to a tree makes the whole
process much simpler to understand, makes your code much more readable, much more easy to
maintain. So pretty much every, every programming language that uses
any compiler, intel iD, they all use Alexa,
and if you ever like to see an error like syntax error,
unexpected token like in JavaScript engine, whatever, it's a
part of telling you it doesn't counter token from lexer,
but expect that Lexing
is also quite often the most work
intensive step for parsing to ast, simply because
[10:14]
your source code has way more bytes
than those have tokens. Usually every identifier has more
bytes, and it's one token, but it's
multiple bytes, and you ask for bytespace and stuff, and sometimes
maybe comments you don't have to parse.
So just, just by the amount of iteration you have to do in
the lecture, lecture can be like the bottleneck. So writing
a fast, if your, if your lecture is fast, your parser
might be fast, but if your lecture is slow, your parser will be slow.
So let's write relaxer,
right? This is something we're going to do, something very
simple, because I want to fit all the codes and slides. And so this is
not any particular language. I'm just going to make something
up to have something we can run bent rockets again
and again, put on slides. So my imaginary language,
I have only four tokens. I have whitespace, which is just the space character.
I don't handle tabs, I don't handle enters or newlines,
anything, just the space character.
[11:18]
Then I have an identifier, which is latin
characters a to zenith, capital, latin characters a to z.
The underscore character and identifier can be any of those
characters one or more repeated, right?
So Foobara is identifier. The number
is same as in the identifier, but even simpler
because it just digit is zero, or all the way to the digit line
one or more. And then I have four operators, plus, minus,
multiply and dividend.
And operator is like the only token here that's always
only a single character. It doesn't repeat. So there's going to be some
differences in code. Next I'm
going to define my lexer. Lexer itself is like, as a
structure, very simple. I need some source code I think I'm going to read.
So this just references the string,
and I need to have a start and end
[12:18]
of a token. One thing you can see for
identifier number, I don't actually put the values of those tokens or
what the actual text in the source code is. The way I like to
do things is the token is just simple enum with no values.
And then if I need to read the value of the actual,
what is the actual string of the identifier? I can use the
start and end on the lecture to give me a sub slice of the source
code at those indices to
give me the text when I need it. In the browser for many tokens,
you don't necessarily need the source. A plus is
a plus. I don't need to go back to the source, tell me that it's
a string size of one byte that says, I know
it's a splat because that's what the token is.
We're going to start to write our lecture the
way I write those methods. This, I'm not going to write like constructor for
the lecture. I think that's, you know, you can, you can figure it out like,
[13:19]
okay, you're going to take, I'm going to take a source and then set start
and end to zero. That's roughly it, right?
You probably would want to write this method as the part of the
iterator trait. The next method
on the iterator trait, I'm going to name them, give them
name methods just for the purpose of this talk, because I'm gonna,
we're gonna go through a few of these at
different variations, right? So our first attempt is, it's naive,
naive lexer that just returns an option of a
token, right? So we set our start to an end, right, because we are beginning
new token. So whatever the end of the last token was, is probably gonna be
the beginning of the current token. And then we get the chars.
It's a mutable value because we're getting mutable iterator
to characters, right? So if every string can rust,
you can get a iterator on characters. That's nice thing to rust.
And then we do a match expression on the next.
[14:19]
So this is, okay, give me the first character. If there is one,
give me the first character in the source code or at the start
of the token. So slicing, and then
you just do partial matching, right? So if it's a, if it's
space, then there's going to be the, the whitespace token.
If it's lowercase or uppercase or underscore, then it's going
to be the identifier. Zero to nine is going to be a number.
And then operators are operators. I've hidden the code
for the whitespace and the identifier because those are roughly identical
to what the numbers,
which is roughly this. That's what the branch is.
After we match the first byte, we increment the end by one.
And then in a loop we also cheque. Okay, while the
next character is also the same pattern, right. So zero to nine,
same pattern, zero to nine, that's identical in the
identifier, just with more definitions.
[15:19]
So why we still match the same byte or the same pattern?
Next byte, but much next character matches the same pattern. We increment n
by one again, and if we don't find
anything, or when the loop stops, then we emit the token number.
The same is true for the operators, except we don't have the inner loop.
We just increment the end by one and just submit the doc.
So that's the entire code. That's like our naive implementation
of Linux. It's fine, there's nothing wrong with this.
And in fact, if you write like this,
just because you write rust, and this is all existence programming,
this is already plenty fast for most use cases. It might be actually good
enough, but we can do better.
And the first optimization, like talk about, which is, I think, very common,
very easy win to do, which is to just embrace UTf
eight and avoid the char type altogether.
[16:20]
A couple of things you need to know. So strings in rust are presented
in memory as UT fate encoded,
and UTF eight is basically as encoding,
is backwards compatible with us. ASCII, which is a standard from 1960s.
It's not changing, it's done, it doesn't need to change. There's nothing,
no reason for it to change. Most of the
time when you're parsing or relaxing source
code of our programming language, most of the time you're just interested in the Caskey
characters that are there. Like, again, the standard for 1960s.
Like you want the letters Latin Alphabet when brackets parented these
dots. Commas, semicolons, it's all in ASCII.
And the important thing about ASCII is ASCII uses byte values
from zero to 127, right? It only uses half of
the byte values. Back in the old days, we used to
have different extended tables for ASCII that would use the
upper half. So if you use Ukrainian, you would have a
[17:22]
different ASCII table for ukrainian or Polish or German or whatever.
And if you then try to send text between different computers using
different languages, you would get garbage because they never agree with the
ASCII. ASCII tables are, and ETF eight kind of
fixes that where it's like, okay, this like the one one universal
ASCII extend ASCII table basically what it is,
but for our purposes, what it's important to remember is that all.
So UTF eight can encode code points either as one
byte, which is ASCII, or as multi byte code
points. But the important thing for us to know is that
anytime there is a multibyte code point in ETF eight,
all bytes that belong to the multiplied code point, they all have
values larger than 127, which is larger than any
ASCII character, right? Which means that if we are trying to find a specific ASCII
character as a byte, you never have
to worry about a conflict, right? There's like
the character for a lowercase a. That byte is
[18:24]
not going to be present in multibyte sequences of
UT fade. It never happens because you're
guaranteed that all multiplied code points begin with like.
But there's reasons for that you can look at. It's actually kind of interesting how
it is designed. Like integrate is really, really good. It's kind of clever how it's
done and also for our
purpose. What's nice about rust is rust actually has byte
literals, so you can do the same. When you write character
literal with a single quote, you can put a b in front of it
and then it's a byte literal. And same is also true for string literals.
You can make a byte slice in literals before
the, before the code.
Important difference here is that if you do the b in front of a
byte slice, then you get actually a reference to an array
instead of a reference to a slice. So if
you needed a reference to a unsized slice, then you just need
to do some casting or something.
[19:24]
You cannot get a fixed size strings because there isn't a type flat
in us. So let's change our code to
just, okay, we're just going to ignore characters. We know it's actually
safe to just ignore the encoding and just
look at the ASCII bytes because that's what we're after.
So we just change one thing. We change the ar
iterator from the source code from chars to bytes,
and then our matching expression, we change
all the patterns from char patterns to byte
patterns. So these are just, again,
these are just integers from zero to 127.
And all this
code is basically the same. Again, we just use bytes next instead of chars next,
the patterns change. We just add the b in front of the literals.
That's it. That's the entire change. We've changed
nothing. We changed to one method, we changed the variable name, and we added
a bunch of beats everywhere. I so always
[20:26]
benchmark things because you never know if what you did actually
has an impact. So original lexer that used
the tars was running at. My little
benchmark that I did was running at 2.14 nonseconds
perturb. The new one is running at 1.28 milliseconds,
period. So that's 60, 70% improvement for basically
doing nothing. That's roughly because. That's because we
know our lex actually does less work. Because when
I get the next child,
the target rate has internally look. Okay, is this. The next
byte is a part of a multibyte code
point? If so, then has this morgue. If not, and even if
you never run into multiplied control, there's always like this extra branch
that has to be checked, which we now don't have to do. So it's a
win, it's a free win. You can pretty much always, almost always do this.
It's safe, it's fine. And even if you
need to, then get the string slice right, because I'm using the start
[21:28]
and end just in the indices, they're going to be the same indices
into string, because subsidising a string slice uses the byte indexes
indices rather than char indices.
So we've lost nothing to gain performance for doing nothing.
The next one, the big one, actually, this one
is much more involved and much more fun, I think. So this is lookup tables.
This is like very, very, very old trick that everyone who's been
in the field kind of knows about.
Lookup table is kind of simple. And what lookuptable effectively is
it's just an array. And now,
since we are now working with bytes, we can actually make a table. We can
make an array of 256
items, which in our case is
going to be the whole table, is going to be size in memory. Is going
to be 256 bytes size in memory, which is important.
We'll maybe get there.
We start with a table. If the table is going to be static, that can
[22:29]
be as, because it doesn't matter. We're going to build it as a
const expression. We can do const expression. So the code
here is not going to be super optimal. It doesn't matter that it's not super
optimal, because this code is evaluated at compile time and
it doesn't have effect on the runtime
performance. So we make a table just
filling it with nons, and then
we just use a while loop, because again, this is a const expression,
so we kind of limit it. We cannot use for loops yet in const expression,
rust. So I'm just going from zero to 255.
I cannot go to 56 because you
can add x 256 in u eight,
and then we kind of do the same thing for the same patterns. I just
assigned values at the index of a byte, I assign the value of the
token for the byte. So a space,
the byte, the index corresponding to the byte
of the whitespace is going to be the whitespace token, and the same for identifier,
[23:30]
the same number, and same for all the operators.
So that's sort of it. So it's a table of fields with nothing but nons.
And then for the indexes that represent
bytes of my individual tokens, I put some of the token value,
right, and this is, so this is like, you know, just my, just my static
array. And then my next method is now actually
much, much simpler and much shorter.
It starts off the same. So I set the start to end, I get the
iterator for bytes, and then I
use my table. What do I do? I look up, I take
the byte of the source code and I look up in the table.
What should I do with this byte? I cast the byte as a usize
to index into the array.
Fun part here is because our array is
256 elements long, even though we don't need 256,
but because it is 256 elements long, and the compiler
knows that the bytes next is a u eight, that it will
[24:33]
never overflow the table. So the rust compiler
will actually, in this example, will automatically omit
the overflow text. Right? Because the rust compiler can
prove to itself that this index operation never
fails, because it cannot, that the table
has enough elements to cover the entire value of vu eight.
So I take my token, I increase the end by one, and then if the
token is not an operator,
because all my tokens except for the operator can have multiple bytes, then I
go okay, give me, give me, give me more bytes, until for
as long as the token at that
index is the same as the token I currently have,
which means this is the same token, I keep just incrementing the end, and then
if it's not, then I break the loop and then emit the token.
This is less code. I think that's kind of simpler also.
[25:33]
So how about performance, right? And this
is really fast. So we went from originally to
14, we went down, all the way down to 0.2 nanoseconds.
So that's almost a ten x improvement of our native implementation
by using a lookup table, which is really the main thing.
Bonus tip. Last thing, I already mentioned
that the lookup table is 256 bytes,
even though it's an option of a token.
About rust, the ABI in rust is not stable,
so you should not be relying on that if you want to do some
magic and safe code. But for the purpose of performance, of figuring how
large things are on stack, you can, you can
use those heuristics. So an
option of a t enumerate like option of a t will have
the same stack as this, the t that you're wrapping,
as long as the t itself has some values
[26:34]
in the value space, roughly, that are
free. So this is true for this, true for references
that are not required. So references have the
new null pointer value that's not arsenic can never be null.
So the rust compiler can use that
as the non variant in the option. But it's also true for non
zero integers, the specific types of non
zero integers, or enums.
Because my simple enum, if I have four tokens, I'm using
four integer values in single byte, which means the fifth
value can be the non of an option.
This is also true for result. We want
asterisks that the error in the result has
to be zero sized, right? So it has to be either the empty
tuple or it has to be you can make us a custom like zero
size tract with no fields. If you ever wonder
[27:34]
what's the point of structs that have no fields, well, here's one
use case where I can make like a named error. Well, ok,
this is like involved token error, give it to data. I don't need
any data, I just need to know, ok, this is an error, whereas the input
is just involved. So as
long as the error is zero sized, basically result of
t and e, where error is zero size is basically the same as option,
right, the same thing where the ok can have some value,
but the error is zero sized, so it doesn't have any values. Therefore I can
sneak the the tag for the error into the
value space of the t. And the fun thing is you can also nest
those, right? So if I have a option
of a result of a t,
if there is enough value space free in the t, which there's
going to be in our token enum,
then the compiler can figure out, okay, I can use one of the values
in the value space for the error, and one for the values in
[28:37]
the value space for the non and the wrapping option.
So we can use this, we can change the way our
function works, can make it a bit nicer to operate on it, because if
I look at the code here, I only return an option of a token,
which means if I'm at the end of the source code
I get a none, which is fine. But if I got an error, I have
to get a non, and I probably want to differentiate between
okay, I've run into the end of the source code and therefore I
get a none versus I'm somewhere in the middle of a
source code and there's an error. There's a sequence of bytes I didn't expect
and that should be an error. There should be two different things.
So I can abuse this fact that I can nest
enums into each other without increasing the stack size and
basically get the error handling at no cost hopefully.
So I'm just going to reboot my table, but instead of using none, I'm going
[29:38]
to use result where error is empty
tuple because it's ideally should be like a name struct
swear. For the purpose of the documented
apple, I construct it exactly the same way,
except instead of sum of token, id is ok of tokenization and then
my method for getting the next token again is roughly
the same. The important change here is the signature of the
return type of the signature of the method. I'm assuming option.
So sum of non values and the value
can be either okay token or it can be an error.
Beginning case is actually the same, except when I index into the table,
I don't use the question mark operator at the end because I want to know
okay, this is an okay token or an
error so invalid token right increment one
and then again this is roughly the
same. The comparison to like the last token is again is the token
[30:39]
not not okay token. This equation like
this cheque is also the same because when it compiles like
assembly, because ok token operator is the same,
is going to be like in memory and like the register in the cpu is
going to be the same, just one byte of the same byte value as
just token operate because of the reason we just talked about.
Everything else is the same. And at the end I just return sum of a
token. So it's going to be some ok token or some error something.
Or if it has existed at the byte bytes
next upfront, then it would be none of and again always
benchmark things so I can add my benchmarks and getting
the lecture with the table of error handling have the
same performance as before. So I added an extra error handling using the
nested enums and cost me nothing.
It's a feature that I added and I have not paid anything for
performance. Alternatively, instead of
doing any of that you can just use logos. It's going to be pretty fast.
[31:43]
So summary embrace CTf eight just figure
out I strongly recommend looking up Ed fate is like the
way it's done is very clever. Also the way ASCII design is also very clever,
you can reduce complex match expressions into recap tables.
I would always benchtrack things because there are cases where the rust compiler can actually
optimise and ideally it does want to do that.
When optimised match expressions into lookup tables itself behind,
behind the curtain. Most of the times when it doesn't do that, it's because
the match expression is very complex, a lot of patterns, and the patterns are just
disjoint. Or like, if you, if you use like the underscore
pattern at the end for like anything else, usually that
avoids the lookup table then, and like hassle introduced branching and branching,
you know, performance cost and
you can nest simple enums without slowing things down.
Yeah, that's it. Thank you. Any questions?
Thank you, Mace. There is time
[32:45]
for questions. We have fuse.
First of all, thank you for the great presentation.
And the first question, what is
different between tokenizer and Lexer?
Is there any difference? No,
it's just a different word for the same thing. I think
Lexer is the more academic word because
token is like a heavy gravity word.
In the terms of token can mean almost anything.
Lexer is very specific.
So you have a tokenizer that splits the source codes into tokens, or you have
a lexer that splits source codes into dex seams.
But usually, I think the usual conventions
we call the lexer Alexer and the token a token,
but they are interchangeable. Like if you say tokenizer, everyone knows
what you mean. And if you say lexim, everyone knows what you mean.
[33:48]
Okay, thank you for the answer.
If the language expect that word can be both
an identifier and a string literal,
how should our tokenizer define this word?
Or is it better not to do tokenization in such case?
So the second question, you should do tokenization.
What you would probably want to do is there
might be a different use case for this, but usually you would just define it
as a word. And then the
important thing about lecturer is like, lecturer is not aware of the context, right?
Lecturer is just like, if I'm reading as a human, if I'm like looking
at page lecture, is that part of your brain that like combines
multiple letters into formal word, but it doesn't care about
the order of the word in a sentence. It doesn't, you know, it doesn't
know anything about sentence. It's just like, okay, I'm just, what is the, what is
the bunch of letters? What word is this? Right, so the lecture is not aware
[34:51]
of any context. That's what the parser is for.
And so, like, actually rust is a good example of that.
Right? Rust has cases where some things can be,
and actually rust doesn't necessarily have a keyword if
you play at any time with proc markers. Proc markers give you access to a
token stream as it comes from the lexer in Rust
compiler. And it doesn't have a keyword defined necessarily,
instead of like all the keywords, also just identifiers.
And then when you parse rust source code,
you just cheque. Okay, well, I'm expecting a keyword,
so I'm just, instead of expecting a keyword, I'm expecting an identifier of a specific
string value, like FN for function.
And in case of rust, this is actually useful because we now have
contextual keywords. So async,
it could be used as an identifier in bus and became
[35:52]
a keyword, kind of, but it's a keyword only in specific case. Like specific
placement can become a keyword. So, yeah, so if
you have like a thing that can be, either can be both, it can be
contextually a keyword, but it can also be used regularly, identifier. And you
just make it an identifier. And then your parser will have to like,
because the parser is aware of the context of what it is actually parsing.
Like in the middle of parsing a function. And therefore I
can expect that there can be, if the next
identifier is async. Oh, this is not a name of the function,
it's actually the async keyword. And then I expect another interface to be named the
function. Right, right. Thank you,
Maciej. If you are not satisfied with the answer,
you can ask other questions or
clarify your questions. And the next question is
lexing a context free operation?
Is it parser's responsibility to try to understand
what the input about, like function
[36:55]
signature or variable declaration? Yeah, yeah,
yeah, that's correct. This is actually kind of
common problem I have when people like open an issue on logos and like,
hey, how do you do this thing? It's like, you shouldn't.
Like, this is, this is it. Like, this is like, people like
find logos and they try to make it a parser. And in some cases you
can. But if you find yourself, like where you,
in a situation where like you, you need context, then, yeah, you need to build
a rexer. You mean you need to build a parser on top of the
lexer. Lexer by default, should not be aware of any context.
It is like a very simple operation of like, okay, I'm just going to transform
the stream of bytes into stream of tokens. I don't care about how those
tokens took place. That's a future job.
You want to divide your logic into those steps, because putting
lexing in some extra step makes the parsing
much much simpler. But if you start putting context into lexer, you're now complicating the
[37:55]
lexer, but you're adding the very complexity you wanted to avoid by
having lexing in the first place. I see,
as I understand, you heavily use macros.
Other question do
macros have impact on
compile time and readability?
Yeah, yes and yes.
And if so, why do you prefer to use
them?
Well, it kind of depends on the project.
So on compile time they do that compile time because
all they do is generate code. So it is a compile time
step that you're adding. So they naturally have to add compile. I think
other people are kind of averse in
diraft ecosystem specifically.
[38:58]
There's two ways to approach the problem. You can just
make a proc macro that uses the token stream manually,
or you can use something like syn and Procmakro two and all the
nice trace we have that makes the process
of writing a proc macro much much easier. But because those dependencies are
very large, because sync particle
has evolved include the entire syntax of rust.
So you have the rust compiler that has the entire syntax of rust,
and then you're adding a third party crate that again has the entire syntax of
rust. And you have like a double parsing to two different spread asts,
but one as a part of the compiler, one is part of the proc
macro. I'm trying usually to avoid that. I'm trying
to most of my proc macros I try to just use
the token stream manually, and I find that that's way
faster just because I don't have dependencies. Although the cost here is
[40:00]
that then the macros can become
much harder to read. This also depends.
Are you writing macros that specifically
deal with rust code?
Are you transforming rust code into rust code, or are you transforming something
else? Maybe you're writing your own domain specific language in
rust, then definitely don't
send, because you just, you just want to take the tokens and do something else
with them. Like my cobalt is my crate,
where I'm using proc markers to make HTML
representation that constructs virtual dom kind of.
It's not exactly the virtual dom, but JSX,
so you kind of need proc micro for that. And then it's very useful.
And I don't need syn because it doesn't actually help me because my
macro doesn't include rust syntax is used like this HTML like syntax.
Right, I see.
And one question, maybe somewhat outside,
[41:03]
before I forgot one thing I would like to add to that there's also.
So there's alternative way to proc markers,
which we don't necessarily have, and I think it's a bit of a shame,
but there's been some work on it, there's some
history that involves some drama, which I don't want to talk about necessarily in
the rust project itself, but there's another way to do it.
A lot of the things we use proc macros for could have been done with
type reflection. And in fact,
if you look at Zig, the language
Z has very nice comp time features and has also
reflections stuff. We use proc markers for serialising to
JSON. You could do in rust the same way it's done in Zig,
which is just, you actually just, you don't write separate code, you just write
music, you just write regular zigzags at compile and use type
reflection to serialise to figure out what the types are.
And it kind of behaves at the end. It behaves the same way
you have like this compile time code generation that
[42:05]
produces like parsing to specific structs.
But in Zika it's actually faster to compile because it doesn't evoke programmes.
And I think Proc Microsoft is kind of like double edged sword in rust ecosystem,
specifically because it's one tool that
is very powerful and very useful that we use all the time.
But it also kind of hides the problem that we have in the language
where if we
could do things like we could have other features in the language that are hopefully
coming in the future, that will make some of the programmables
obsolete and that will actually also improve performance time,
compile times and stuff like that. Because Proc Microsoft,
it's a powerful tool, but it's also very like, it's a blunt instrument and
it's very heavy to use. It's like shooting the flag
with a cam kind of situation in many cases.
Are you saying that Zeek language has some function
of proc macro and reflection
[43:06]
built inside compiler? Well,
not, you can say the language kind of like
the main advantage. The main good thing about Zig is like, it's like
the whole comp time feature where it doesn't have generics and doesn't have proc markers,
but it has this comp time feature that kind of functions as both or like
it actually doesn't need generics and doesn't need proc markers.
There's things you cannot do in zig that you can do in rust. Again,
my cobalt, you would not be able to write completely custom domain
specific language that users non zig syntax in
Zig, but you can do it in rust because Pokemon are way more powerful than
the complaining, powerful in terms of what you can do with it.
But if you want JSON
string to abstract, then the way, if you look at the
JSON parsing in Z and then look at Serdi
30 is way more code and it's way more complex and much harder to understand.
It's awesome. Just perfection
[44:07]
when it comes to russian engineering. But yeah, we could have
had a simpler way if only the language had some extra features.
Correct me if I'm wrong, we can write any
domain specific language in Rust, while the
language can be handled by Lexar.
By Rust Lexer.
Yeah, as long as the Rust lexer accepts your input
as tokens, then yes, there's even like it's not really
used anymore, but there's what's
called, it's not J's. There was,
was a different crate for, it was popular for like
embedding Rust into Wasm,
and that had like a J's macro where you could just write a J's exclamation
mark, and then you'd write JavaScript code inside
rust code, but that's a string, just like a regular JavaScript code,
[45:10]
and it would transform that into string
and put the variables in and then make all the
bindings for you. And it was kind of magical.
I mean, it's still there, it still exists and still workable. But I think most
people have moved to wasn't binding
in that ecosystem. But yeah, you can put any other language
inside the rust, almost, almost any small asterisk,
because the tokens need to be valid. Rust tokens.
I see. And a few more questions,
one which might be somewhat beyond the
scope, but I will ask anyway any alternatives
to proc macros to avoid compile
time increase,
like code generation?
Are you aware of some of such kind of techniques?
Yes. Well, two things. One is declarative macros, obviously.
[46:11]
So the macro rules macro.
So if you can make a
macro work with just declarative macros, they are almost always faster.
Code generation. Logos actually has code
generation that was made by me, was made
by someone else who made the contribution. But because logos
is so heavy on code generation, you can basically just take,
if you just define your token in a separate file,
the same source code, the same code that handles the
proc Microsoft you can just use, okay, I'm just going to take this rust
file that has the token definition and put
it in a CLI like code generator that will generate
all the code that macro normally does. And then just like,
okay, here's this rust file, and then just compile that.
And then you don't have to run the proc Macron compile time,
you can just put it in a CLI. And if you do something
[47:12]
like, okay, I'm doing like a very heavy,
but then again, Lexer is actually a very good example of that. My lexer probably
doesn't change that much. So I can, instead of using proc markers, I could
just use a CLI tool where only if the lexer
changes, I have to rerun the CLI tool and generate a new file
for that. So yeah, that is an alternative.
So is the decrease of time
of compilation only benefit of using code
generation or there is some other
benefits. I mean, I mean it's,
there is no better for performance gain than doing less work. Right.
So if you, if you put code, if you put work that you do at
compile time and just remove it, move it somewhere
else like the CLI, and then, and then every time you then compile,
from that point on you just compile already compiled or co
generated from the workers. Already generated. And then, yeah, like you always win performance
[48:14]
because, you know, you remove the entire step from biotech.
So it's always a win. I see.
It looks like one more layer of,
I don't know, abstraction is not the correct word.
We use proc macros. Pipeline,
I guess. Sorry, like build
pipeline or something. Yeah, pipeline. We use macros
to make some work during compilation
and not to do it during runtime to
make runtime faster. And we use
code generation to make compile time
faster. Yes, I'm actually aware of
Servo, like the browser engine. Again, this is
a circle. Like 2016, 2017. I had
a brief look at it and I don't know how it looks like now,
but back in the day, proc markers weren't even
[49:17]
a thing yet. So Servo was using a lot of python
code to just glue together a bunch of rust codes and then compile
that. So people have been doing that for as long
as rust has been nothing. I'm worried people have been using
cogentation as extra step to like two things.
Yeah. Few more questions.
How does logos compare with other legs in crates
and approaches? Why would you recommend logos every
time or it depends on, would you recommend logos every
day or it depends on the use case?
It depends. So I'm not super aware
of other things. I know there's like,
I'm bad with names, so you have to excuse me. Well, there's definitely nom,
which is more of a parser generator. There's another thing where you,
[50:18]
I will not remember name, I'm sorry to the author. But there's
another crate where you define your syntax of your language in
a, a separate file that has its own syntax.
So it's basically like its own custom DSL for
defining the syntax. It's kind of the same way you normally, like,
if you, if you look at like not academically,
but like a white
paper kind of definition of a language, then they usually like write like
if you like, if you, if you look at like webassembly
specification, like the official one, then there's a very
specific syntax people used to define, okay, this is a how definition of a token.
And this is like if you combine
these couple things that are already defined before, then this is definition of this.
So there's a crate that does that where you
write in a separate file definitions of your tokens and then definition of a function
and so on. And then it writes like an entire parser for you as well.
[51:18]
I'm blanking on the name, I'm sorry.
But yeah, like I would recommend logos if you want to, if you want to
write the parser yourself, because I think most of the autoclaves typically
aim at writing a parser altogether. If you want to just manual
write the parser for whatever reason, because you want more control over it and
you just want the lexer, then logos is the tool, I think.
And also because on the interface of
what it does, like logos is very,
it just annotation on your variance. Like there's, well,
logos adds very little code to your,
that you have to write to use it. Right.
You could easily like in the future, rip logos out and write your own lecture
and everything else would stay the same. Right.
It's not very invasive from the same authorization.
Did you mean like yak and GRM tools?
[52:18]
It is example of creates.
Yako has implementation in rust and GRM
tools has create named lrlex.
Maybe you are aware about it now.
Might be aware, but I'm thinking of, thinking of,
I'm still bugging on it, but I don't think it's those two. I think there's
something else I'm thinking about. I don't know if it's still maintained, so this also
might be factor. I just know, I just remember this had
like a really cool logo. Okay,
moving to the next question,
can you please elaborate on some common pitfalls or challenges
developer might face when writing a lecture
and how to overcome them? Basically your presentation about
that, but maybe you can add something.
Sure, come on. Pathfals,
[53:18]
stuff like parsing like string literals
can be surprisingly tricky. So string
literals, okay, start with double quote, and then you
parse until the end of another double quote, but then, okay, you can
have escaped characters in the
middle. You need to find out, okay, if there is a quote,
double quote with an escape backslash,
whatever in front of it, and that's not the end of the string. And so
that can be tricky. And then if you do something like
python strings that can have the triple quotes, or you
can have raw strings with r and
then multiple hash characters, and then at the
end there's a double quote with the same number of multiple hash characters,
that can be tricky. Comments can be
tricky, surprisingly, both like block comments and line
comments. Line comments, I think are a bit simpler, but like block comments specifically
can be quite tricky when you have much things
[54:20]
inside of it. Yeah, I think
that's mostly it. I don't know, even something simple like numbers
can be something surprisingly tricky,
because like the way I actually did in presentation now, I did number, I did
like, okay, it's only did it zero to nine repeated.
But out of the time, if, if a number begins in programming
language all the time, like if number begins with zero, it expects to be just
be zero. Like you wouldn't write ten as zero
10, right? You would just write 10.
And depending on the language, you might allow or not allow that
syntax. So there's, there's some trickiness there.
I don't know, I think that's mostly it. I think. I think, I think parsers
are way more tricky, especially based on
language you're trying to parse, like arrow
functions in JavaScript, or hell, because up
until you get to the fat arrow, the list of arguments
[55:23]
can be just like a sequence in parentheses,
like sequence of variables in parentheses, which for
some reason is valid JavaScript. So like JavaScript has like
this like syntax
ambiguity until you meet a certain token, which is also like.
Interestingly, if you ever wonder why rust
is using like the pipe character for foreclosures,
it's because there is no operation
where the pipe operand is the
first token in an expression
other than the closure in
the pipes, because it's the unambiguous token.
There's never an ambiguity, there never has to backtrack the
token stream to figure out what's going on. If the
first token in a token, in an expression is pipe,
it's always a closure. That's why it's pipe, pipe and
[56:26]
body. I see,
I see. Thank you for the answer. And a few
more and we are ending. Is it possible to do
the same J's code embedding as
we do often in rust in zig programming
the language? If you can answer,
I don't think it is okay.
That's the answer. I don't think it is okay. Especially since
you can do all of our, like, even if you don't use the token string
directly, you can make a Pokemon that takes the JavaScript even
as a string, and then you can, in the programmakers you can take that value
of that string and then you can start parsing that manually.
Bye. Like you could make a proc macros that takes the value of
a string of a JavaScript and then use logos inside the proc macros. So now
you're, now your proc macros have proc markers,
and then you can parse the JavaScript there and then do something with it.
So yeah, again, proc markers are way more powerful than the complaint
[57:26]
in Zig, but Zig is somehow nicer,
even though it's more limited, but it's nicer and generally compiles faster.
Okay, and the last question, what is your favourite tabletop game?
Oh God,
I don't have a good, actually, I actually have designed my own that they probably
by now played the most. It's not public yet though,
but it's like a five versus five skimmers working.
I really like, just from design standpoint, I really
like Frost draught just because again, it's very simple,
streamlined mechanics. I quite like that. I played by a bunch of far
cry. Yeah, I know. I also like play like role playing,
role playing games with D and D and D and stuff.
But yeah, like typical war games, like Warhammer, like the big warhammers.
It's touch too much, too many models to paint, too much to manage.
So like it's mostly like the skimmers games and role playing games.
[58:27]
I see. Macei, very thank you for the participation.
We are very glad to see you here and for
sharing your experience.

