=== ROW 282 | f015640 | https://youtube.com/watch?v=cwFFcl9VeAs | 2024-09-20 | youtube ===
[00:00]
Yeah, correct.
Hello! Oh, thank you very much. Thank you. Alright. So we're gonna start.
I'm your host for the for this talk. My name is Andre.
I'm really stoic, and I listened for many, many years, and I was the regional back in a day organized of you.
Be rusty pain, and right now our work at fairer systems, a company that also focuses on rust a lot, and in particular, we also interested in grass for automative industry.
Yeah.
We are building a version of qualified compiler called Ferro scene, which we target for automatic industry, and in a I don't work on pricing.
I work on rust analyzer, among other things, and mostly doing rough trainings, and also some custom customer projects.
But we are big believers in rust and big believers in rust, in safety.
Critical applications, like in automotive. So today, we have 2 incredible people with us, Andre. And and so he Serie, is a principal C plus plus engineer at the company.
[01:12]
Intelia, and he's been doing c plus plus for 15 years and more, which is super impressive.
To be honest, and he is also interested in Rust.
Like many many programmers out there, and he's he's working very hard to make C, plus safer.
And also to use rust to improve safety of critical systems even more, and along with we have Andrei, Henri Sherba, who's an A.
C plus plus architect at Intel is with 10 years of experience, but importantly, 5 of those 10 years are related to autoimmune industry, which is super cool Henri has been working really really hard to make our cars more safe better to drive more secure and also easier to just use and more
comfortable, which is super admirable, because cars are scary.
[02:12]
They're big. They're made of iron, and they can kill people, but they also do a lot of amazing things like moving stuff around.
So anyway, they will talk to us about use of rust in our automatic industry.
In particular, in which in itself is a very, very big consumption of companies.
I think. Bmw. Toyota, Mercedes.
I don't remember other club brands, but there are like 300 plus companies that participate in this big initiative, and together they're building set of programming standards, guidelines, etc., etc., about how so certain things in our cars.
Software wise has to work. So it's a very important work that they do, and they'll talk more about it.
So the stage is yours.
[03:12]
Great. Thank you. Hi! All happy to see you on Ukrainian rascal Conference today.
We're gonna discuss benefits of rust usage in optimo. Can you bring next slide?
Yeah. Great aust enable, Doctor, sar, we will discuss benefits of rust usage in of the most future opportunities which automotive domain can bring to Russia's developers and great perspectives for us to became part of the motive in nearest future.
Your speakers, me and reserve said he not so, and also we should have special guest on Q. And a session.
Chris Patty, 200.
Let's start from overview of of the star and of the market domain itself.
Automotive is really huge. There are a lot of different directions of development you can see here, many of them.
[04:18]
But of course not all of them, because automotive is much more bigger.
On this diagram you can see how fast after the motive is growing, especially last year, so you can see how fast number of uses is growing inside of the car.
One note that Ecu is electric control unit. And basically it's functional note inside of the car.
So we can make straight line between number of Vc use and the number of functionality inside of the car.
This grow is based on grow of features which we have inside those a car, you can see that the last 10 years we got a lot of new trans and directions inside of automotive like electric cars connected cars autonomous driving systems, and especially very important is software-defined
vehicle concept which is basically game changer on the market.
[05:21]
Because now we are looking at current, not like on the vehicle which can bring us from point A to Point B.
Now we are looking at car like on big smartphone with next slide.
Please.
If we are talking about optimality, no chance to not talk about that are a bit.
So after Star is very big concerns inside of automotive, which was founded 20 years ago in 203, and today it has more than 350 partners and intelligence.
By the way, also part of of the module consortium.
Next slide, please.
Currently automotive has 2 platforms on the left side.
You can see out to start.
It is well known technology and the market. It is based on C, and has monolithic architecture.
After Sarclassic was optimized it for low latency operations and high A/C levels.
[06:21]
A still, its functional safety level we'll talk about it a bit later, and on the right side you can see after Sarah, do you? Platform?
Its new platform. It was not created to substanceitute classic one.
It's a created to be an addition to classic platform and meet new challenges which we have enough to motive.
What to Sarah? Do you, already based on 14, has said we said oriented architecture, and optimize it for flexibility and high performance operation.
Next slide for our presentation. Important to talk a bit more about the communication stack in optus are, adopt you?
Since we have service oriented architectures that we, using proxy, skeletton pattern for communication between different services in general, you need to make service interface definition using Rxml format, its special xml like format for updates are and the from this service interface definition we
[07:24]
will generate proxy, skeleton interfaces, and need over transport layer.
Using all of it we can establish communication between different services.
Next slide, please, as I promise we will talk also about A/C levels and functional safety.
So I so 202, 6, 2 is functional safety standard in optimum.
And it is very important standard, for of the motive, because of the multimedia really cares a lot about safety inside of this standard there were defined for A/C levels Acl, as you can see, it's optimal safety integrity level.
And we have 4 levels from lowest A to highest D, we can view an examples like both real lights, failure is still a because it' can lead to some harm.
But maybe to not be King insurance. An on opposite side.
So steering is Sld because it any failure here can lead us to very big insurance.
[08:27]
Next slide also would like to talk more about projects of Russ integration in Afghanistan.
Here you can see a timeline of main milestones of rust integration in Optimocho in middle of 2019 we got first articles about roasting of the Moto, and in September 2020, we already go to very good presentation by Fer all systems.
About the benefits of rust usage for functional safety development, and after market also.
In February 2021, Ferracine compiler was announced it, and it is very important, for of the motive, because this compiler should be compliant with Iso 2, 6, 2, 6, 2, march 2022, 2 working groups were created Warren
was created in Sayye. It's society of Automotive Engineers, also very big organization inside of automotive.
And another one was created in Afghanistan, and me and Sergei and Christophetic.
[09:34]
We are part of this working group in after so Christophe's lead of this in October 2022 Romanian startupoxy toys raised it funds more than 1 million entities important for us, because this is is written in rust and recently oxidized joined after star
as well. So we have chance that this will be use.
It in automotive, in the future, and from a current activities which we see is that some are project is under development.
It's a rust implementation of some IP protocol.
It's important because some IP is use it for communication in of the Sarah W.
And also recently, we got full support of unix neutrino Standard Library, which is a very, very popular operating system.
In October with you. Next slide, please. On this slide you can see several more projects with Rustin of the motive, just to show you that there are much more projects with rust and of tomorrow.
[10:38]
But we cannot go through all of them because of time limits of this presentation.
Next slide, please, from all of it we can see several major trends.
One is that c plus plus does not hold monopoly in optimality world anymore.
And at the same time we see that the rust is looking for new areas, new domains for expansion and automotive is very good candidate for it, and also we see that Carmakers and tier one suppliers are already preparing ground for applian roasting of the motor
next slide, please. On this face. I would like to pass the stage to my colleague, Sergei.
Please go on. Second.
Hello, Ed, so now give you a brief overview of 2 intelligence projects related to rust and automotive to my.
And here's the first one. So this is the project about rusty programming language in corporation to their adaptive SDK, this, this has started about a year ago, and still being developed by several members of it is our working group safety and intelligence is one of active contributors.
[11:49]
There the main goal is adding rust. Api.
On top of the existing Api. On this site you can see the architecture diagram of the project.
At the bottom level. There is the posix compatible operating system, on top of which there is depth to the platform, consisting of multiple services with standardized Api, for instance, look for login or bird for data persistence, etc.
There is a special called Com, or Communication.
It's not used directly, but rather by skeptons and proxies.
The Blue Code generated from this service definitions you before.
This is the base for matches. Our applications, like the one at the left, and there goes our integration.
[12:51]
So we have different wrapper C in and rust Api on top of it, and this Api helps build in native rust with our application.
Now this Api is in development. It's still not complete.
This is the communication diagram. You may notice some additional layers were added for us.
Applications to communicate with each other, and other applications.
The main idea is communication, transparency.
All the applications can talk to us about applications the same way as they talk to applications.
Now we'll go through the key points of the implementation, so we'll just talk about 3 of them.
But there are many more. So first, we are using because SDK has a synchronous Api based on futures.
[13:55]
So we are assembling it, and the runtime we're using now is small.
But there are plans to replace it with a runtime.
It was other, I think, current times. The second big thing is co-generation, which consists of 3 parts c plus plus bindings.
Generation by the existing tool. Trust bindings generation from service definitions, and this mind is packing to rust library.
And.
See bindings do that from the generated Trust code, with the binding Bungee, and so that the up code could be called back from the layer.
And finally, we are compiling the project to different platforms, supported by the SDK, which creates some challenges for us, because the linkers are different from the standard one which is Ld.
[14:59]
For for us. Now here's a small example of the main functions of trust, or to their applications resp., basically, it's the same application.
And here you may notice that the rest code is much more concise, and is using some Asin calls.
There, so now I will give you a brief example of how the code generations going on.
So there is another service. Definition. It's basically an Xml document.
Here you can see the definition of a method called adjust with 2 inputs and with one input and 2 output parameters.
And from this definition our SDK. Would generate code and our trust integration in turn would generate trust, proxy, or the see wrapper of this method calling it synchronously and at the bottom there's an example of how this could be called from rust application looks much simpler than
[16:13]
the rest, because all the complexity is hidden inside the integration layer.
We're working. Next chapter is about practical example of an application based on this rust integration concept that we have just seen.
So Intel has recently initiated an internal concept project of integration.
It's a wheeled robot capable of autonomous parking with software written in rust and running on what is our adaptive demonstrator platform, which is the reference platform we're working with?
And the goal is to gain some experience in real automotive rust projects and to extend the company's portfolio.
Now I'll briefly explain the main algorithm.
So the robot is driving past some wall with parking slots and scanning it with a side attached ultrasonic sensor.
[17:22]
Once the big enough slot is found performance, the power parking manure occupying the the slot and the calculation is based on free space polyline estimation for the parking lot.
Also the autonomous driving is supported by odormity, which is the estimated weak opposition based on counting will revolutions.
So this is how the menu is. Looks like.
So now the project hardware set up just like this.
The project is controlled by by raspberry Pi, connected to the host.
Computer with Wifi, and there is to their adaptive platform so installed on it, the robot.
We also have not sonic distance, sensor motor driver, controlling motors and speed encoders.
[18:27]
And now here's the software design of the project. Okay, and hardware abstraction there, or over sensors.
Currently, it's just one sensor. Ultimately, distance sensor and it's linked to data processing algorithm, where which is not yet implemented.
It's supposed to preprocess all the data, the communication with the host is based on our com, which is communication subsidies.
All of these aspects into a rust application on the this are adaptive platform as a service, and also there is a Gui client application which visualizes the free space data, and the week.
And now I'll show you a brief demo. How it's looks like at the moment.
[19:27]
So, frankly. It's rather primitive. There's no robot platform.
Available, yet so forward moment is in software, we're using a box that shows as an obstacle and moving it to and from the sensor to generate some free space data.
And you can see clusters of dots which represent the free space polyline.
And there's a lot of noise now, and but it will be ruled out once we post-processing.
So now, what are our further plans? The rust integration project we are going to replace the com stack with the rests on wire protocols, implementations like summer, for example.
And this is done to reduce the complexity of code, which is quite complex.
[20:30]
Now, because of different layers, and Iffy and so on.
Also, we are going to integrate the project with adaptive demonstrator platform.
And next thing is to extend the rust integration to classic platform, and it should bring the some great benefits, because rust has built-in support for embedded development like terrible no, and we, with no Sd configuration.
And top of that there is a great, easing framework called Embassy, and that's for our robot project.
Next steps would be adding the data we processing, replacing the movement, simulation with the real robot and implementing all the vehicle packing algorithm.
[21:30]
So what conclusions would we draw from this first of all?
There's active trend towards rusty cooperation into automotive rust provides memory and safety.
And thread safety out of the box, which is of great importance to automate world, and is one of the technologies that could enable rust for many car companies in the world.
Okay. Here's the A collection of links which could be of your interest, and a separate slide is about links that were that are about the time of that, we have shown before.
Thank you.
[22:31]
Now, good, talk about questions. Yeah.
Alright. Thank you so much, both of you. First of all, we have a poll right about the future of us.
Development in automotive right. You can vote. What do you think?
On, on, on this, on this, and we we can talk some more.
Andre is being answering questions that be. People will post, in which was, Oh, almost no, honestly sounded feel, because we're gonna ask those questions and answer them again because we want them to be part of the video.
Anyway. So let's see, and we can go in any order right?
So people asking about, like other applications of rust not only cars, but like food, medical supplies, delivery robots, things like that right?
[23:33]
And.
Yeah, yeah, basically, I'm the sure about the other domains.
Because today we were talking more about rust, and after Sarah, and after.
Sorry it's purely aftermarket technology. So it is used it only enough to what is not to use it in any other domain.
So for me, it's hard to answer about any other domains which also use safety, critical functionality.
Yeah, I could tell from our side, like from side we when we were discussing about like use of rust in this safety, critical scenarios sounds like different industries have different set of standards.
Automotive industry was relatively easy to start, because, though the standards are very, very hard to follow, but all standards are hard to follow.
Right for car for car market. In particular, there is this one big group, one big industry association that that allows once we pause, those standards and bus, we integrate with this stack will be able to enable rust usage across wide wide set of industry right and then moving
[24:56]
from that to other domains, like aerospace of industry. Right?
And then moving from that to other domains like aerospace, for example, is much easier after you're done with cars.
If you start with aerospace, then it's much, much, much more difficult.
And meanwhile people could already benefit from rust usage in that industry.
So, car, relatively easy to start, relatively easy to get things standardized, and that was the goal.
Right, right. The next one is so is mostly C and C, plus plus.
So what's the point of using rust?
Said he, they want to answer this question. I guess this one. But there, see, it's to you.
Of course. So the main goal is to make the development safer because there are multiple studies that show that also there are different tools like static analyzers, different compilers, certified compilers.
[26:06]
There are still a lot of human factor when working with Cn.
Yeah, where there is no guarantee that you can do something wrong and compiler is not obliged to control this.
So, in rust. It's back into the language.
So I have board checker and exceptional design of the language which enables us to write safe application out of the box, and it it's working for a big amount of applications which are functional safety creativity that means that they are somehow related to a
hazard exposures means that they could. The failure in them bring some harm to people in the current.
[27:12]
Yeah, so it's very important for them to be set to be reliable and safe.
Make it easier to write such applications. Also, it's more modern.
This c plus plus and doesn't bring a lot of baggage of backward compatibility.
So!
Yup, it's has a lot of benefits apart from memory, safety.
So a lot of components are trying to or are going to use it.
But there are some things that currently are not yet available, like, for example, integration that we are working on, and so that things are still in some transition stage.
[28:14]
I can bring, you know, one example. It's so pretty popular in optimization, example will not go into the details.
But anyway, I don't know many then about years. So about that there was a case in Toyota when there was a bug in memory management, and they just at some point those code inside of the car go and corrupt a part of memory, not it was a bed control of step and they just corrupt part
of memory in other regions, and car start accelerate. And that's all.
And that basically this car start accelerating. A driver cannot do anything because it was because of this buck accelerating.
And this car was fall into the wall and killed 3 people inside of this car.
And basically it was even a luck that no one of pedestrians was not there yeah, so was there could be even more injuries.
[29:19]
And that one case, how bad memory management can lead us to very big harm and to enrust it.
It, this much harder to make such kind of mistakes in C, plus.
Plus. We are applying a lot of static analysis to avoid this cases.
But anyway, you need to think about all Mr. You need to cover by this static analysis and the like said told, it's human factor.
You just cannot cover all and miss one small point. Do not cover it by static analysis.
People also can miss something, and you will correct memory, and it will make not correct functionality.
And especially now we are in front of a autonomous driving.
Yeah. And it's even more more significant thing.
Because you let it go to the car. So Driver, not even controlling so much like it was a previously, and there is much more software, and it is much more complicated to control of the software. And so on.
[30:38]
That it's a reasons why we are looking for more safe and to reliable solutions for safety.
Critical functionality in the account.
Yeah, there were other stories like this with other manufacturers.
We shouldn't single out just one of them. And thankfully, these stories are rare and far between and over time, with the adoption of rust they should be even less prominent than they were than they are now.
Alright. People ask like, are there any production cars right now that run some rust?
Nope, not yet so.
Yeah. So the short answer is not yet.
Oh, Rob, I would say, probably probably because not all software requires such a.
Yeah, you can. Okay.
Yeah, that was I was for trying to get to right your entertainment system.
Think that, for example, a car can show you the current weather, and it might be using curl to get to make all leap coral to make the request for that, and leap coral dependent on how you build and compile comes with Ross back and forth depending on how you build and compile comes with Ross beck and for some for some parts of
[31:51]
Agb stack for Tls and for the other things.
So, and a lot of projects that currently run on top of Linux like for some auxiliary stuff like, I don't know sound system, or whatever they are.
Now start to add modules written in rust, so you might have a situation where one of the few 1 million lines of code that every car has currently right.
One of them will be, or will be, running rust.
But inside the what's this called ecu?
Also, it depends. So if it's some Hmi application, it's human.
The control unit right now. There are no.
Human machine interface.
Yeah, human control interface. And so zoom human machine interface.
So it's not covered even by a so it can use rust.
[32:53]
Also they are bringing enjoy it outer and cotton. There.
Yup!
So they are also not part of this. So you can see that not only rust is trying to have some share there.
And yeah, this area that can already be some rough applications I can tell about.
Bmw. There they were using some small system, parts that were written Rust.
But it's not. It's more like system level software.
And it's not covered by A/C levels. Oh, there are already some attempts to use rust, but it's going to be better.
Cool, cool. So we have a few more questions like people asking are operating systems like arrows.
Which is a robotic. OS or errors, too, are using.
[33:56]
And Andre mentioned that auto Star is already a platform.
You build stuff on top of it. So.
Oh, I can extend it a bit. So basically, it is possible to use both of them inside of the car.
I don't, didn't hear about such examples, but it is possible.
So you can deploy up to Star a classic on one I see you after star adaptive on another cu, and, for example, the Rawson Cu.
If you want today, if it makes sense. But our projects, which we were talking about today, they are about rust integration, integration into the star.
And if you use after sorry, you cannot use anything else.
I can add about Ross. So I've worked with Ross one of previous projects, and they are mostly used to do some.
So they are not used in real production.
They are used to develop some outreach like, and then they are written in different platforms that are more native to a certain carmaker.
[35:12]
So that's the thing that I know. But maybe there are cases when it's used in real car.
But I doubt I doubt it.
Yeah, probably. Yes, because, as we told the automotive cares a lot about safety.
And we have a lot of hmm. Now, things which we need to do to prove the safety of this technology and for us, it's not compliant with automotive safety standards.
And of course it will be hard to release this car on needed savvy level.
So maybe for some not safety critical. You can use it. But the but the still it will be hard to use for any safety.
Critical things.
Yeah, we have quite a few more questions. Actually. So do, do you have time to stay around for longer?
Yeah, yeah, have a bit of time.
Oh, that's cool, that's cool. So people ask like, while you were integrating with rust how you found any bugs in the underlying CC.
[36:13]
Plus layer.
Well!
Nope!
Yeah, I was wondering, like, so.
Yeah, well, yeah. The question was about the applications, but we are not working with real applications.
Yup!
We are working with the standard, and oh, sorry! So ideas that we are working with this adaptive demonstrator platform, which is the reference.
It's not used in any car it's used to build other platforms which are certified, and they are closed, sourced.
And we are using so called sample applications, which are demonstrating the abilityilities of this.
System. Yes, there are some box there, but I wouldn't say it's this software is highly covered by tests or something.
[37:25]
Yeah. Oh, all right. Oh, okay, Mark, this is answer, yeah.
Let's skip this. Do you see?
The moment Sam Ross applications in the standard software that big automatic costs company like Tell you the fax logging group, Jm.
Tesla, etc., like not in the control unit, but in the entertainment system.
Another parts. There's definitely at this point, there's definitely some rustle in the already, because they do this over the air updates right?
And a lot of these cars for entertainment systems.
They are running. Android and Android has rust inside, so.
Yeah.
Have you measured the amount of unsafe code you had to? You had to write.
Do you use any unsafe blocks to talk to see?
[38:26]
Of course.
I presume? Yes, but was that a big, big?
Was it a big part of work? Was it a relatively small part of work?
I would say it's the biggest part, because the because of the and I think, rust that we are trying to implement there there's a lot of things that we need to to.
And it's not like Api.
It's post pair with Ops. So we need to maintain some binary.
Theatibility.
There is a lot of bugs there, I guess when we're talking about safety, safety, safety of the application written last in session manner.
So the main a source of box would be in this integration.
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah. Yeah. I was wondering how you do that. Right?
Do you use? Did you write your bondings using like C by engine manually? Did you use some?
[39:30]
Yeah. Hmm.
Cxx dot ras, or any other like builder, to make cross and see talk to each other like.
Okay, I, I can cover that. Yeah. We were thinking of using Cxx.
But there's a lot of complications when using it, because part of the code is generated.
So it's not possible to include it at the time when it's and the R code is written.
So it's all generated.
I see bindings for a plus code, because it's 2 way communication.
And basically objects are passing Thef file layer to and from.
Yup!
So, for example, there is an ascent call, and you need to start it in rust, and then carried on in the, and then return the result in the rust.
[40:35]
So it's rather complicated. Yeah, we have already fixed some box there.
Yeah, related to life. Times, yeah. Love them are also very complicated.
And also we're trying not to use nightly.
Because we're not using it. Some things are not just possible.
So we are also thinking of using the of implementing the synchronous Api on top of our just simplify things.
Part of the standard. Yeah.
Because, yeah, we are waiting for is in trades to be part of yeah, yes, stay stable rust, because without them it's yeah.
It's Nope so good. But, as I said, it's still in progress, and and some things are changing.
So kind of state. It's not how it would look like in year.
[41:35]
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah, I want to interrupt us, because I want to mention to participants that the next room is opened.
So if you want to go, listen to the next talk, you can close this window, go back to the go back to the lobby, to the website to pick the next room and join there.
But I presume those that stay with us are still interested in this topic, more so.
Let's continue discussing it here. So this is, we do have a single track conference, but it works like a if you're here, then that means you are in a corridor, and someone is already started.
The next door. So anyway, I wanted like in it, about a synchronous, I can tell you.
That like, it's a big kind of war. I'm not really participating actively in a sync working group.
But I'm one of the people who are like reviewing.
[42:36]
It's work all the time at first, and like it turns out making a syncretase is like several layers of complexity, and I was expecting them in Q. One.
This year, based on what I saw, that in a progress in the middle of last year, right now, it doesn't seem like they will come until Q.
3 or q. 4. So. And if they come they will probably come.
And so some limit state, and that makes a sync work a bit complicated because you have to target specific runtime on one side and also right in individual futures.
On the other side, I assume, since you were using small, you had to implement small futures, smallerware futures for for offers are right for our account. Right?
Yes. Oh, there's a lot of code. I can't quite remember this.
[43:39]
Yeah.
Yeah, we will not go there. We will not.
Go into the into details, and just a very, very cool to see that not only you did just basic integration.
You also decided to tackle on the sink question, which is a very, very complicated subjects on the cell, on self.
Right? So people, like a more general question, right? We talked about like rust coming up to cars, etc., like there is a other side of the coin right to for us software to appear in the car.
Someone has to write this software. And do you feel like there's gonna be a big uptake in rust projects of companies that participate in automotive industry at this point.
So basically I can take it for now, you know, we see some small activities about it that we also attend.
[44:44]
Yeah.
Tell us where a're looking for some Ross developers, and you know it's not easy to find to be honest, because for of the module customers want to have automotive experience, and there is no chicken egg a question what to start first can the date should know
rust and top. Tomorrow. But there are no projects already with rust and optimum.
Not much of them, but I know that rust is, use it actively on wolver, for example, they have projects.
I know that the Bmw. Had some projects I heard about projects in related, so a lot of companies are exploring projects with rust, and when when we will prove from our sides that it can be used it for others are adoptive for example, when a some companies will finish those projects which may be not announced now but the in
[45:44]
progress, and show also proves that it is, for can rust with after with after.
Well, then, we'll it probably has this pump.
Of course I don't know how long it will be, because, you know, it can be sens more like hype.
But anyway, that we will. I expect this pump. Yeah, that we will have it at some point. And I's that this point is pretty close.
Yeah, I would add that I like not the project. Do not have to start in the car at the car manufacturers side only, like companies like internal us are doing a doing some experimentation companies like also another software.
Company is doing is doing a big push, and on that side, on their side the story goes like similarly, like Andrea, we, they have a bunch of people who can, who worked at automotive industry on software side.
[46:45]
And now they have teach them to teach them rust, or switch them to rust, but also some people who know rust might come in and join later, because in this is something we are observed in many industries and the industry starts moving from c plus plus to rust and move developers from c plus plus to rust and
then they realize that they need pure rust, experience, and only then they will add people who are more like Rust's have general Russ knowledge, but not the domain.
Knowledge. The main knowledge usually comes first in this. In this industries and car industry is one of them.
All right. Okay. This was answered.
This was answered. Let's see what we have. Oh, that's an interesting question.
[47:46]
If we have 2 systems that have different safety level requirements does it mean that they do not share memory?
They have their own like memory. How do separately?
Yeah, I think so. It's not possible. Well, at the higher requirements.
So it will violate sod. They share memory, I guess.
Yeah, so basically, general approach is that lowest Heyl level is your A/C level?
If you want to put components, for example, aclb, and then you will put component with issue a at the same hardware and we'll communicate with it.
You can put it on the same hardware and checks that it will not corrupt memory.
[48:51]
It's possible also is not the mandatory, that they will not put it, but it's hard, and in most cases it's components are just split it to different hardware.
And it really reach, reduce amount of work. It's a much more easier just to split them to different hardware.
Yeah. Alright, so people asked general questions about others are like, is it only about autonomous development driving?
Or there are some other features that it covers.
Currently, what would that other side do?
It's totally not about of the normal driving, you know of the start, especially.
After. It's very old. Well known technology on the market and main main, for it is to work with embedded, embedded features inside the of the.
[49:54]
So you can a work with some stabilization systems, and so on, which are a.
This is, systems are on the market from early to oh, from the beginning of current century.
Let's call it like that. Yeah. So autonomous driving is mutual challenge.
And the basically, it's hard to update, even autonomous driving system own of the because it's optimize it for this embedded syncs and low latency operations.
And mostly for after autonomous driving, and not only for over the air updates for connected cars, technologies, and so on, was created after adoptive.
And now we are working with it. We'll see how good it will match.
This challenges. So yeah. But in general, after star, it's a for embedded software of the car.
[50:55]
It's not about an autonomous driving, and the autonomous driving.
It's something pretty much new which we are working with.
Yup, and when we talk about autonomous driving, it doesn't mean like full scale, like you sit in a car like a passenger right?
A lot of subsystems, of autonomous driving can be applied in some smaller cases, just making sure car doesn't like bump into other cars.
So parking assist technology, things like that. Right? So a lot of these new things, well, new, we don't have to wait for the full self-driving cars for it to be usable.
So a lot of this might put Tickle down into office are not outside.
So bought software built on top of it. Speaking, yeah.
Yeah. By the way, can do one comment here. Unfortunately, I have to cut out the this slide about level.
[52:00]
Uhhuh.
Of of the autonomous driving because of time limits.
But I had it so. If people are interested, say, Can Google this call it the say, yeah, levels of the normal driving?
And we have 5 levels. Let's go even 6, because we start from 0.
Yeah.
No optimization. And now we are about on the sort level, starting certain level of this autonomous driving scale, and there would be more correct even to not call after normal strikes and call highly automated driving because we are not talking about autonomous driving now, we are talking about highly automated driving and even here we are not
in very much state so. Oh!
Yup yup, so you used a reference reference platform for to do a technology demonstrator.
Do you think that part of this, or part of the SDK in general will be available for us developers in future for everybody who wants to do something with us?
[53:14]
I cannot predict the future. So there are plans to include it.
To the this demonstrator platform. Currently, it's a site project it's not included.
Then we are going to include it to the standard, or at least not include included to the demonstrator, and could be like, not alternative.
Api so there's kind of some bureaucracy, so they are not willing to accept trust as a full software stack language.
That means that you don't want to write the whole stack in rust.
But yeah, there is some pressure from some members of the consortium, but the management is not currently open to this.
[54:20]
So most probably it will be like wrapper. Api over this standard Api, and it will be available.
Well, the whole demonstrator platform is not open source.
Unfortunately, it's also a big question that we're has been discussed for quite a long time.
Yup!
There are some licensing issues which it doesn't, which don't allow it to be open.
And yeah, there are legal matters. And so, but for the members of the consortium it would be available.
In the year's future. Maybe next year.
It's my prediction, I think, for sure.
Yeah, that's cool. We we like on our side.
I think, for seeing compiler should be somewhat available also.
[55:21]
Not open source, but I don't know to to the 2 individual partners.
First, and it will also be available only like the plan, I think, was to get it done last year.
But some certification takes a long time, so maybe this year we will have something people ask like, if you use unsafe code right?
What's the point of using rust, then? That's a general question not related to cars.
Oh, and safe code doesn't meet. It is key. This is broken, totally missed, that you need to take it with a greater care than other parts.
Of code.
You cannot write.
Currently without unsafe code. So our AIM is to do all the programming and unsafe inside the wrapper level and show only save Api, which don't.
[56:27]
Yeah.
And.
Make you use this unsafe parts. Well, the only way to make it not use unsafe is to write it from the bottom in rust, which is not possible.
Well, at least 100% possible. Maybe it could be somewhat reduced.
I mentioned that we are trying to, or we are planning to replace some parts like communication stack to rust implementation, and after we do it we'll remove a lot of unsafe code.
Already!
And one comment from functional safety perspective basically Esther, he told the unsafe.
It's not doesn't mean that it is broken code.
That user just need to make more care about it. And the if we will put this unsafe parts in the wrapper, which maybe even will be generated by scripts and develop a application developers will not have to do it.
[57:33]
Then we can do from functional safety, perspective justification. You can just write your justification as developer of this course, that yes, you have.
Check it, and do you make sure that it is safe and no problem with the functional safety on some level?
Yeah, of course, we have a A/C levels, and that that can work it.
This approach is working on production projects. It's not not the problem.
It's not common approach, but anyway, sometimes you have some library which is not certified for need. A digital level.
But you no check test. Go inside, analyze it, and knows that you can use it.
This part of this library, and it will not broke overall.
Safety. You can just rise this justification and your overall safety key chain will be correct, and no problems also, with this.
[58:35]
Yup! Yup! The way I see it right. You have to be careful.
In sight. Unsafe blocks and rust. If you write c plus plus all your code is inside the big, unsafe block.
So you have to be careful all the time. So that's one of the biggest reasons why Ross is so interesting.
Final question is like, Do you hire rouse developers at the moment?
Not as a moment, you know. We had. We were loosing for I even talked about it before that at some point we were looking for, Ross developer for Optimality project.
But it was not so easy a to find to be honest.
The cost customers have very high expectations for forage developers.
And currently, currently, we are more working with this concept and preparing ground for this more intensive grow of rust projects in automotive end of the service, especially.
[59:46]
And then hopefully, projects will start because Intel's is a outsourced company.
We are not product company. So it's hard for us to start some project by our own.
We more working with oem and tier? One companies projects, but we are preparing this basement and preparing that this also one of the reason why we really want to join this conference to show developers.
Okay.
This perspectives, and to show to meet, you know, Marker, that the guys please let's let's start.
Prepare for read. We are working to enable this project, and we are expecting to.
You also will be ready, with some background and level of understanding of after, to join this projects.
Yeah.
Thank you so much. At the end. I want to mention that our poll about the future of routes shown that 43%, almost half of participants expect a lot of projects in the next 35 years around automatically, 4 us and I agree with with that and another 36%, thinks that this's gonna be some activity.
[61:04]
But it's hard to predict it, for now. Yeah, Hi, personally, I have somewhat an insider perspective as well.
But I work at another service camp and another consulting company.
That also does so work for automatic. A lot of things that are happening right now is a groundwork.
And the real work like building exact software that is going to target specific call models that are gonna be released in the next few years.
This work has not started yet, but it may start very, very so either this year.
Next year, the year after which, in car incar industry is incredibly quickly right.
So we are optimistic about it. Thank you so much for coming.
Thank you, Andre, and for answering all sorts of questions, this is very, very impressive work that you are doing, and it's very, very cool to see this work.
[62:04]
This will be done in in Ukraine, you know, in in the company that has a very, very big representation among Ukrainian developers.
So we'll see. We always interested in seeing more challenging in a more important, more critical projects.
Come in on, because we have such a good set of engineers with a very, very good look at skill, set curiosity, and diligence, and we want to see more of that company.
Yeah.
So thank you so much for that once again, and thank you all for staying around for us, asking questions.
Yeah.
And yeah, if you want to know more, we will have links.
We'll have the presentation. We'll have the use released at some point.
I don't know exactly but it's going to be like, in a few days. In a few weeks.
[63:07]
I don't remember, so we'll figure that, but follow the news on telegram on Twitter and other places.
Thank you so much for coming.
Thank you. All nice to hear.
Thanks. Yeah, thanks for your attention.
Bye!
Yeah.

=== ROW 284 | f015644 | https://youtube.com/watch?v=KbgeaHou2qU | 2025-03-10 | youtube ===
[00:11]
Hello!
Yuck software like the hard work.
[01:35]
So. Thank you. Paul, let's start.
How long.
So, what I will talk about today, I will talk about how the compiler understands and sees such a type as a generator, as my team and I decided to look into the compiler's diabra.
And to understand how it works, in order to be able to get the information from it, which we really needed in order to save this generator in the database, 3 a little about myself I work in the company, alantis as the head of the gas department
development and also as a technician on one of the projects, here we are engaged in the development of software for Bken and Solyushin, and what we will talk about today, we will talk today about what a generator is. In general, it is in order to
to have an understanding of how it works, what it is used for, what problem we tried to solve on our project, how we as a capilator sees the generator, and how we obtained information from it about the generator as a cue
[02:56]
I'm sending what we found in order to save the generator to the database so that it can then be used.
You can see on an example what a generator function is and how it differs from an ordinary function, that is, an ordinary function, it is a function that has a beginning and an end, that is, an entry point and an exit point, no intermediate states, it
does not have it, you can run it and get a generator result from it, in turn, it is a function that can have an intermediate state. This function, which is indefinite, has a beginning, it has Po.
[03:58]
When every time we determine the depth or selfie, banachi uu and the generator does not do the calculation every time, it remembers the last calculation that was done ie the last 2 numbers and just adds them and the last one
result i.e. each time, the function stores the intermediate value.
This is how the generator looks in general, and it looks roughly like a raid generator, which has parameters, a resume function, and types of parameters, that is, what intermediate states it can return through
Gild parameters he can accept When we make a Summary and what parameter can return when I myself finish my work in a computer sample generator opki type, that is, its structure is not visible to
[04:58]
user What the user can see about the generator, for the fact that it implements the third generator and nothing else Well, what is its internal state, what is its representation of structures and none of this can be seen and I will tell today how we
they saw it, er Well, what is it, if you dig a little deeper, dig into what a generator is, a generator in general is a function that turns into a standing car, if we talk about times, then in a sample there are 3 main states that are for each generator.
They are created when the generator itself is created, this is an anaresumterative panic andreum before the generator starts, ritual is when it ends, that is, it is already completely over, panics are when something happens, not so during
generator, it works and there is an undefined number of states, it all depends on how many eld rhythms are inside the function generator itself, it can be like 1 or such a number depending on how this function is written, that is, it is in the generator by
[06:17]
basically, means that in this generator, the return value is returned and the generator will be in one of the states Suspen tandem if you look at this example, then suspense tandem as For example, if you look at this example, then there were 2
Guild generators and accordingly 2 intermediate states in which the generator can be before it ends and before we move on.
In order to understand how this generator generally looks in the capilator, I will give an example on which I will show today.
All results. Research is an example. Such functionality.
Such a process as sanin the system through the code This process can be described as a generator task, that is, when we create a user generator, the generator is given a phone number in order to be able to send and therefore the picot also later
[07:25]
This one is received from the user, and validated that it is the same as we generated, sent that it is not the same as we generated and from the rule, this is an example, quite simple in production codes, not
is used purely to show how you can use the generator, this is the ability to store something inside the system and if, for example, look at the first state of the system, when we start the function itself, we transfer
inside the phone number, the function generates the guardian is sent to the PI code on This phone number.
And then it is in an intermediate state, that is, the Guild Wheel is called. It is possible to make a Ritual from the Guild, that is, some value, turn it like this, and you can, when the mode will take place, you can go to this place, Deild stopped, for example, line 12, you can
[08:27]
transfer the value externally when the function summary is called, accordingly we expect in this function what command the user will transmit, externally, for example, he wants to send the Picot again accordingly, the function generates a new
So Picot sends again. The user saves this example in an internal state and continues to wait for a command from the user.
That is, when the user sent the code, we want to validate the function by checking the code that it generated and sent with the code in the parameters when
The resume was sent. If it matches, we are logged in.
If it does not match. So we did not enter the system and there may be an uncertain state when the command is transmitted, the disabled generator is in standby or resent or validate and we gave him, for example, a number, a new number
[09:33]
phone, it is better for such a case to generate another generator and here we show the media function, how it looks, how you can call this generator using OK, that is, we take the summary, call it and transfer it to it.
The phone number and it returns the state in which it is at the next resume, we send another command, resent, and it again returns the state in which it is and the last one transmits with the eye subcode and wait,
from him that he will return the sex or the file.
So what were we trying to do? The Ot generator: an example of use with a self where there are intermediate states that need to be saved, this is quite such a small example, he showed, and what generators are actually capable of, that is, with the help of generators, you can describe complex
processes that have Intermediate states that can be easily That is, it becomes a kind of machine and we thought that if we take the state of this generator, save the database to disk, for example, whether it is Duyson, at some other moment we will take
[10:52]
we deserialize this Jason back into an object and continue from the place where we stopped last time, i.e. if the system is improving, it can simply take this Jason later and make a summary with
the place where it ended.
How to do it Before we get into how we did it, let's talk a little bit about structure.
Compiler. What does it look like because it is important to understand what methods we used to get information about the representation of the dpa generator into the compiler if you look at the official site
since it is possible, they have an article that describes the structure, the compiler, which Internet representations of the levels it consists of.
[11:53]
three-present actually once at a given level.
It converts the code. In It is more understandable for the compiler, that is, for example, the handicaps are turned into loops with break conditioners and other simplifications so that the compiler can work with them.
And then the Peace on the Measure actually builds a big tree of transitions.
And at that level, there is no relation to the code that can be read by a person, in fact there are solid solid trees, transitions, solid shells that are very difficult to read, then it works, optimizes and turns into a machine code
the code, and in fact, what is not on the official website of Erast, between the skin and the measure, there is another level called the tier, the so-called type of wellinter-presentations at this level is just the compiler, more
[12:59]
works with types, how they are represented, how they will look from a distance. So, in fact, this level is the most important and most interesting for us, because it is with them that we will mostly work. There is such a thing in the compiler, sometimes
crate interface that can be used and this thing allows, in essence, to write a program that will call the compiler interface, to compile some code, which means that it is possible with the entire structure,
compilers work to extract the information we need. That is, once you have connected your interface, you must pass it the files you want during the execution of your program so that it compiles, and you can
writing code in such a way as to extract information about the types that are in these files can be done through a macro step, for example, run it as we did, that is, before compiling the program, you can write about a macro that will call
[14:07]
rss interface that will extract all the necessary information about types and will pass generate code based on this information, the main type is the Rast middle Thai, in fact, it is the main
structure that stores information about all types inside the compiler, and it works most closely with it at almost every level.
From hir to barking, it ends there.
From ez.
And so, somewhere like this, the Luyalt generator looks like through the eyes of the compiler, when it comes to the generator that I showed above, with the example itself, that is, it has 4 states andreund return panic, and saspit 0
[15:19]
Suspense zero listed. How many types does it contain inside, that is, in this state, how many objects does it store inside, and here you can see that it stores the phone number of the picot of the Bull and the same arcs
structures for transferring the arguments themselves inside the phone number inside the generator.
compare and was actually this way it keeps track of whether the function ended successfully or failed with the states.
Andreyunteraturm and Paniki everything is clear.
They are defaulted. And with the Suspend 0 state, it's a little more complicated, because having this information, from the compiler, we still can't say that suspend 0 is a structure that has 4 elements and you can simply
[16:24]
put these 4 elements and make For example, casting and determine and extract data about the state of the generator itself, we went a little further.
And we are a compiler that allows us to get not only the generator itself, but it allows us to get a life hack of each of its states, that is, of each leg, dynamo and what it looks like. For example, you can look at layal tsapid zero.
What is his site 64 bytes lining 8 bytes and you can see these structures the most interesting files where it is shown which offset and from this section you can understand, for example, how
The structure looks with the eyes. Computer, and knowing from the previous slide that there are 4 elements, taking, for example, the size of each element. For example, the size of the background is 24 bytes and you can look at
[17:29]
for example, 24, the byte is actually here behind the set.
32 That is, the fund number is like the first element, in fact, in the structure, it is the second element, the first element is the sanin arguments in which sais of 32 byte its offset of the beast
i.e. the first element in this structure will be sanin arks, it will be placed then Fon number.
element and the fourth element is Narizal himself. He put it as it was. It is 1 byte and it has a size of 58. All this can be extracted.
From the compiler itself, having this information, we thought that in principle we can take the compiler interface, extract the information from it on the computer through mackus and generate the necessary for us
[18:38]
structures in order to be able to cast a generator into some structure, hang a soeralization on it and save it. For example, this is also a dream object, and then you will zoom in on it somewhere later.
And we started looking for a way to do it Well, and do it?
It's actually quite simple if you spend some time understanding how the compiler works with these structures.
Actually? This is how the structure looks like from this sanilgenerator.
That is, there is a union that monitors the state of the generator itself, in our example, it looks like the arrival rhythm of the panic and the suspension of the stars, the suspension is described as a structure here you can see what it has
alignment and ordering of the objects themselves, that is, the arguments themselves go first, Fanamber oti picot sanin Innresalt and so on.
[19:42]
This Mn. So! This is an important thing because it is actually stored in all the structures here.
For example, I did not show But Anna Zyum these are not simple objects.
Here. These are also structures. Which have 1 element.
It actually shows us, it actually stores information about what state the generator itself is currently in. That is, if we take, for example, a function on the generator, the discriminant, then the same discriminant, so yes
determines in which state from zero to recovery to three the generator is now located this is an existing element of every structure we determined that it is implicit
information We thought that it is possible, in principle, to write a procedural macro that will generate these structures for us, and we can write a small casting that will simply copy the state of the generator to our
[20:56]
to our General structure, i.e. We will copy all the data from the generator to our structure, it is already a care type, i.e. it is already a type for us with which we can do any actions, make functions, hang others
the third can be hung and we can already use it as we like.
And later. We can take this generator and restore it, that is, for example, it was implemented in Jason, deserialized back into an object, and started from the place where it ended, but a very important point is that in order for this
do. I took a copy of the generator and I saved it somewhere, then I implemented it back in Odesa into an Object and I want to transfer it back to the generator because I just like that, I won't call the generator on it because it doesn't implement
[22:01]
this trade and in fact the capilator will not allow it, it will not understand what I want to do for it, so I need to add it to an implicit generator, like and for this I need to have at least the initial state of the generator.
Even in Andreyunt in Anriyun Stan, I can simply create an object of the Saning generator itself without summarizing it, that is, simply create a type, attach my structure to this type and call a summary on it
and even then, at this moment, my generator will start from the place from which it was previously, in which it was previously stopped from that state, that is what we carried out when our team worked on this generator, what was carried out and that the generator, as
its function can actually be very interesting in terms of describing some typhoon processes.
[23:03]
Sami This is a very small example of how to do it. There can be much more Examples of much more.
There can be no states, in principle, you can make them either with the help of state machines and freem vorks, they become machines with callback functions or with the help of a generator that will operate on the internal state
independently And only accepting input parameters from the outside and relative to what state it is in now will decide what to do so the code can become a little more frequent from this, but it is a little not very clear way of describing such things, that is, if describing
for example, Fibonacci counting. So this is a typical way to do it, but describing more complex l-processes is not the same as how it is used in the industry, they usually use the site of the machine, but
[24:14]
and after finishing this research, we saw what risks, that is, firstly, that the generator is actually an element of unstable where.
Compiler. That is, it is now part of the stable version of the language, although they are built on partial implementations of this generator. I have a generator that uses 1 and the same engine and senkit as well
state functions that store the internal states of the landscape, the generator, it is not very stable, that is, the compiler from the conpile to the company can change this state, which tells us that every time we compile
program You have to look at Loyalt, our generator, in order to have the latest Data and it makes it a little difficult.
[25:17]
They are difficult in customs, and you also need to write a pretty good library for generating these types, and you also need to somehow think about how to reduce the share of compilations, because to use them, in fact, it is like a double compilation if
use procedural macros. This will significantly affect the compilation there and we will need it. In fact, penfol is a thing that, in the end, is that there is a very large one, and the generator, with proc macros, has increased even more
this company time? Many times Well, and that this thing is actually very difficult, we go because if the developers of the computer, they decide to change something in the interface, then we will have to follow it, or we will not be able to update
[26:17]
to the new version of the compiler, or the tradition of redoing or reanalyzing what changes there were, and finalizing your code, we learned such lessons, after some time of research we decided that OK, the generators are not yet ready to be used in
We ended our research on production code names on this, although there were plans to make a pass to the compiler so that they would give the opportunity to clearly take the state of the generator and save it further.
We did not go on this, I have everything. Thank you for your attention.
So ready to listen. Question.
[27:21]
Hello.
I say Why can't Mm hear you?
So. So.
[28:38]
This is just if, if you dig very hard, you can do it that way.
But you always have to look at this, here is my answer, you have to always look at how much effort is needed to implement such a thing and does it really make sense?
That's it.
We, for example, researched it in detail and worked with the compiler, worked in the compiler and wanted to prepare for a pause. But business is such a thing, it is very strict, let’s say Yes, the efforts that will be received
from the fact that we will do it, there are not always vectors for it, and it can be done, we just need to put in a lot of effort in order to implement it, but I think that many people would be grateful to us for such an implementation.
[29:58]
Taka. Repeat. Please. Yeah.
No, this is not Open Source. That is, we did these studies and got the results.
And here are the results. I show, but at some point we decided that we will not continue to control this project.
No, I have not heard about this raid, and if I had, I would certainly be able to talk about the effect, but they did not prove it, meet.
I think functions use a mechanism similar to generators for internal representation.
Is it possible to use trustee interface to generate structure, to represent intermediate suspectsension states of emphasisc function?
[31:08]
Can this be done? That is, if used once. Its interface actually says that this function is synchronous, it allows you to get all the necessary information in order to be able to do what we did with the generator, I will repeat in
generators and spikes in them are 1 and the same yn used by the compiler, so it can be done.
Underneath.
No, it will be even more difficult than the generator to make.
[32:10]
In fact, the layout can change from the build.
In fact, there seems to be a network that indicates that this type of randomization will not be very Randomization will not be very Randomized, that is, it will be possible to predict that the same person barked and we can use
Cache, for example, in order not to run these proc macros every time, but for example, if the new version of the compiler is changed as rules, for example, the creation of this option, it turns out that we have this structure that can somewhere
we will not be able to resettle in the database. For example, it will be necessary to restore and describe the rules of Migration from the new hundred of the old way that conners were presented to the new E.
[33:26]
No.
I know what you're saying. There was an offer. But I don't know how far it is.
Came in No, actually They put it in the compiler that there, without changing No, this webinar will be the same and it would actually simplify because very often.
They use these deterministic builds in order to compare, for example, binaries or sometimes no one uploaded this binary if nothing changed in the code. But at the time when we were doing research there, there was
the function that generated this barking and it was directly stated in the text that it was a chimney, that it was a process, that is, it is impossible to trust that it will be the same from the build.
[34:29]
these are deministic. In order to be able to trust, well, that would actually solve a lot of issues for us.
We could not worry about many issues, we could not worry about the fact that this thing that we would make would be very sharp in production because we assemble the code once and everything will improve, then it was very cool.
Huh. If you remember it like that, it seems to me that they used both for the sake of security and for the sake of this representation of types.
It was packed as much as possible so that these structures do not swell too much, but I think that is the main reason.
[35:35]
These are the Sikerites. Was it?
So. So. You can dig further into the compiler, that is, take this interface this time and look further.
What? He?
No No warm! Animals No!
Okay. Now.
Can you repeat it? The second part Hearts of what?
[36:38]
So what are they Ping. They use it that way because it is needed to give a guarantee that the object will not be moved there and that they will not fight, in fact we did not enter, we understood earlier that we do not need to continue
research has so far tackled this problem.
It was with the Pin type at this stage when we finished with the loyalt with its generation there.
Another question arose as to when we will use the Union only for objects.
What is not a copy ball, you need to use maniol, drop, somewhere at this stage we realized that it is very cool.
But to prove it to Production is a separate project and easier.
And we started talking, with the architect we started talking about what might be better to do, crawled Kombyl to the team, to give them such a proposal that they add the ability to extract the state of the generator itself.
[37:51]
Again, due to the fact that there are task priorities.
Are we up to that? They did not arrive, although I think somewhere in the future.
We can get there.
So. Dad. Metastyles, on such examples of synthetic ones that I showed and blue ones, and it worked normally, I think, 1 of the reasons why we stopped further.
Going through the fact that there was still a lot of work to make sure that it can be implemented and it will not fall somewhere wrong, work.
Be!
[38:52]
Macros Pisheshmakras Macros allows you to use an external crate in order to perform some action by connecting your interface and in fact it allows you to launch the compiler interface when
Are you compiling the program?
That's 1 more candidate No, That's 1 more compiler.
In Russia, there you can really play with the optimization of this thing, as Pavlo said, but this is still 1, in fact, the stage of compilation, through which all the steps are taken, and it is also very important during the crisis of Bildas.
[39:53]
And these are the same compilers, i.e. different interface satchels.
Is it the same compiler? Which one do you have in your car?
It costs the same version, it just gives you the opportunity to watch in your program.
Okay.
Let's say it to the date, Yes, I can't say now, Because we're going on like this.
They worked on practice in order to understand whether it is possible to do it at all. But I think that it is the same with this problem.
We also met what this world could be.
Okay.
We use Secgres.
It is more secretive by the Republic team and in fact, we wanted to describe the processes for aggregates through generators.
[41:00]
For example, we had a generator that talks about the user.
And this generator. It would create information about the user's status in the system, for example, I registered in the system, ie, generator, gender.
In such a state, which says that you have registered, I changed the password in the system, it changes the password, and accordingly its state, already with a new password, that is, such things, more global, we tried to determine when to describe some entity by
using the generator itself, for example, the user.
In the system, actions performed from the outside are simply a command that is passed to the generator, and it is possible to transfer, for example, use, to another state, for example, password change, it goes from a state, such as a password change, and waits
until This password is confirmed or something like that Is that right?
[42:00]
Now what I'm trying to remember, from which examples, plus any entity in the system, still has some state, and it's just about the fact that these states of coins we also used vensourcing that these states they
events are rolled in. Then, when registration takes place, we simply take and, for example, roll out the same events and bring the system to the state in which it was in the areas of the new team, and through the generator it
could be done because the state of the generator itself could be used as a Snapshot.
Well?
[43:03]
Yes, the usual old code in the old ceiling, that is, we have si-ky orest, and it has names and players, it has command handlers, every action in the system is logged, for example, which seven page then
is rehydrated and it is written through the Garden of Comanhandler and venta Player functions, the usual structure, these comanhandlers process them, a certain amount is written depending on the number of commands, i.e. such
A typical approach to writing a framework is some kind of strategy that implements, for example, a process, and it has command handlers, it is transferred to the sadkomat inside, depending on which command came and calls, for example, one or the other
the function that it knows to handle this command.
[44:23]
Nata.
So.
With Me, it seems, at hand.
Hmm!
Can you speak English? It.
These days.
[45:23]
Oh, okay. When you create generator, right? When you when you create a new inst of generator and then set up the state to the generator, what kind of type this generate? A has?
Is it like a Dean trade object, or is it something else?
What's the type of the variable, the torque, the generator.
It's like a three-bit, that is, everything that can be understood that this generator implements, Tet and everything that we can use it to call this summary and nothing else, in general.
Got it got. It makes sense so like if we try to do similar thing with a sync functions, we would just get a future, whatever right?
Okay.
Uhu Well, that is, with aspens, the question sounded very similar with aspens, it's actually a cupcake.
It was my question. It was my question, yeah, yeah.
Thank you. 3.
[46:23]
Sure.
It just generators themselves. They like you said. It's a nightly feature, but it's interesting to be interesting to try something like this with a sync functions because they themselves are stable.
Eh?
Even though the internal representation, like I said, it changes all the time.
Maybe it's not their own.
This is actually a very interesting question, because the generators themselves are in the ensemble. But even if you look at the presentation, the person who made this prole of the generators, made it in the compiler, asinyka and generator, use 1 and that
the Enjin itself is for these states and it is interesting that they are stable asins and the generator has not been able to start a stable cycle for several years.
Umhm, if you try. Actually, if you try to debug a sync code using Intel, J, like either idea or C line, or whatever they have, arouse debugger, if you debug a scene code, it will go through this generator, code you will see this yields and everything.
[47:37]
Ta-ta-ta
So it's it's like, Yeah, it's it's all up and running.
They just don't want to send it and if you look into it they're like them.
We want to standardize it. I looked it into Rfc.
For January is, too, because it's very, very strange when you have a language that has a sync away, but not generators.
So what they say is, we want to standardize it, but we are afraid that them might be some corner cases that we haven't discussed, and because we haven't discussed, we don't want to standardize.
Yes, that's interesting. When will the Generators be added.
Cry.
I don't think it's gonna happen soon. To be honest, I think that everybody is happy to keep them on for, like I don't know for ages, maybe forever.
Well, actually what you said is true? And there are many crates.
For example, what is the name of the generator, they actually tried to create it, it works, but I will not say that it is a production generator, created with the help of macros, that is, it is a macro that returns what is needed and it is not bad in order to
[48:56]
to learn Just definitely not production-ready and we saw this crate.
What it is, but I decided that it would be cool to use the built-in feature of the language and with the generator, because when you use the built-in, it is more stable than, for example, using a crate, which is not very
production-ready there. It looks more like he is there to have fun.
Yeah.
Lot, mushrooms.
And what?
[50:32]
So.
And the point is to stop short by media or summer.
So. Thank you for the question: And as for generators, they can be used. That is, for persin, it makes sense to move, but in fact, it’s how to watch from which distance, if, for example, you watch purely for appetite, then it is. It’s great, it will perform the task. But if
for example, look at Sik-ores and Ivan Sorsing and Sikera, this is a way to divide the lineages in the Wright model to roll there, Eventa players, Komanhailers, and so on.
[51:43]
And what is, for example, aggregate work or aggregate, that is, it is an entity that describes the state, that is, it is an element that describes the state of some business entity, in the system, and we tried to make it, that is, they are also aggregates
have, as you said, business- Er data Lair That is, the aggregates are also stored, in fact, the aggregates themselves are not stored in the system, but they are stored when a snapshot is taken, that is, the snapshot itself
generator, but in order to write a generator, you need to describe Fremburg to take For example, a convenient way for a name.
There are taplayers, komanhanders, these Ivans, they are transferred to the database, but you have to take a snapshot of Garegat himself once in a thousand events so that there is a long process during registration
and here is the generator. In this case, it also fits very well. When you want, take a snapshot of the generator itself, you just take its state in which it is now and make a snapshot of its entire internal representation and
[52:58]
write to the system. That is, in fact, the same task is performed with the creation of a snapshot of the aggregate in a different way, and it will also allow writing these aggregates in a cleaner way, that is, it is not necessary
no structures and you simply describe a function, for example, a user, a generator, you create fields inside this function and that's it. This thing lives with you as a structure until the system is destroyed. That is, it
Let's say yes, the generator is a combination of structure.
Plus the trait is the implementation of this trait. And the generator is a function that will automatically turn into a structure and implementation of functions. Well, what about the bindings of the business layer and the data controller, for me it is
the same level of inconsistency appears.
[53:58]
Which when writing structures and functions, because everything would be equal, there would be another alarm that works with the watchman of the generators themselves, the generator itself, itself.
B could not create this layer and it would be in a completely different place, and as for the binding, to the language Well, that is, if, for example, we implemented this method through Generators, the only option would be to work, for example, to take another language
programming, also connect to quores and vensourcing and write, for example, what, for example, this formation language could work with this system, it is correct to correctly describe the Structures in this language
programming, such as For example, events will roll and so on.
Although this is not really a problem.
I hope I answered the question.
What hmm?
[55:27]
No person is actually possible. It's pretty hard, then.
Yes. Date, that is, the limitation is like a limitation and that it requires a lot of investments, and technical and to do it and even close communication, that is, while we did it 1 times, 5-6 times the discor where the teacher, the compiler of the team came
I communicated with them so that they would give an understanding of some things there, and we would even, as I said, think about making our proposal.
But this is no longer an applied problem. That is, it is a task that requires direct allocation of time.
Work. A lot and even then she will give an effort, that is, some veler for business, so we stopped, but this is absolutely what you said, it would take away the need to use For example, some kind of framework for writing become machines,
[56:33]
I have experience with writing standing machines, in various fields, these plus plus including and they do not look very friendly.
Yes, Well, what about vmbed? Yes, but in a cool example, diabetes was given to the point that you input, for example, a car standing on the barometer is a typical approach, in fact, the car standing there is used absolutely everywhere.
But
Oversee it.
[57:52]
No, here you actually have to think about how it can be implemented.
It's already more. Probably, with the functionaries, with which I am not very familiar with using some thought, I will add something similar.
In order to be able to describe a very similar state, I remember when we first started I looked at denotations.
In order to understand how they work and it looked like it would give an opportunity to actually do that, but the truth is that there are no muzzle notes to the manada in September.
[59:19]
Well, like this.
Multiple.
Well, it's just a kind of way of doing, let's say, doing processing of what's there in the old ways.
Many hundreds of 1,000 projects are already being developed and just make it more convenient and understandable.
Perhaps, to some extent, rather yes, but now you can hear. But you can hear me now.
No. Okay.
That's how I ended it because, let's say it like this, what we did with the generator to notation is an approach to writing things that are written in a different way, they are simply written not so beautifully, they are written that way and that's all.
[60:27]
It all depends on whether the industry is ready to invest, for example, that is, a bunch of projects, written and working on not very elegant code, but the importance is not how beautifully written, what it does is important, so I think, such
cool stuff that manifests itself in conditions, programming they do it by enthusiasts, and topics For example, by companies that really see the problem and for example, better writing code it will affect the goals not white ones
programs, but will require a higher threshold of entry from those people who are not used to writing the way the industry has been used to for many years.
[61:35]
Look at the closing speech.
Yes, thank you. To everyone. Thank you. Pavlo and good evening, everyone.

=== ROW 285 | f015645 | https://youtube.com/watch?v=hm7HnPZEQWo | 2025-03-10 | youtube ===
[00:03]
So hi! Everyone again, I think we are ready to start now.
My name is Paul. I'm here to introduce our speaker, our speaker is Turkey Simonan coach, a chief technology officer of the 2 companies again, automation and outer Tech.
This company is the Shells in industrial automation solutions Sergei has been working in tech professionally since 90, 94, 1994.
You mean? It's 30 years of experience, almost so great.
She's main focus in automation of industrial processes.
He skilled in impressed number of fields, which include thrust, python, webassembly virtualization, server, hardware, Pcs.
Internet of scenes Cloud and Linux, Turkey. You'll talk about cross-platform desktop apps in Russ and Qt is a popular framework for creating graphical user interface.
[01:05]
And now before, Sergei takes the stage, I have to remind you that there is a Qa.
Button on the bottom of your screen, and you can open the Ki window and ask questions.
The whole talk, and we will. We will discuss those questions after the talk.
Thanks, and so we. Your stage is yours. Now.
So. Hello, everyone! My name is Sergey Simonanco, and unfortunately, my skills are unable to allow me to enable we doing zoom.
I wish I had one more to connect the camera.
Okay, it's working I mean yesterday, but no chance to to make it work today.
Okay, so first of all, let me express my gratitude to organizers of this event.
Just a my name is Sergei S. Manenka.
[02:07]
I have 30 years of experiencing it last 20 or so.
I live and work in the Czech Republic who doesn't know where it is?
It's a country around rock. So let's go with presentation.
I specialize in industrial automation. But I will talk about.
I gonna? Talk about interfaces. Why? Because it's very common question that people want to make some tiny.
The sub application for the software and they don't know which framework to choose.
Actually, why do we still write this top applications?
It's 2,020 free. There is no Http.
Sometimes. So you are talking with an industrial devices like classical databases, and maybe sort party web services.
The last case. Of course you can make an electron application. But it's not my way.
This, sometimes the top application are just fosters and web browser.
[03:15]
Sometime, right. They require more access to the local machines and Webassembly can provide.
And so the main. What is for me is no limitations.
You can just take your desktop created.
The can create and use that on desktop without any modifications.
So you can use multiple tracks. You can use Tokyo.
You can use any other. Us and Chronos runtime.
So actually development, it's much more faster.
You can create application with no HTML and Css.
Code, in and guys, my presentation.
They mentioned that some people just say hate HTML, so there's a bonus you choose a framework with not HTML, because sexual assistance now nowadays, maybe everywhere.
But taking accounts that users must download and install your application like physically, like a program so in my sector is not a problem, because people are used to use software from nineties so say download and install everything you tell them.
[04:28]
Without any problems, so let's go next. Why couldte for us to file?
I locked you to a lot about 20 years. There are actually 2 be grown up players from the market. Qt.
And gtk.
Sometimes. Can you hear me, guys? Sorry. Can I write some?
Yes, yes, it's fine.
Okay, because because someone is complaining his.
Thank you. So that, 2 big grown up players qt, and Gtk.
Except personal. I'm watching on all players like Eui and some so, and I hope with one day we'll start writing like solutions, safe desktop application, and ask.
But now there's a situation. It's like this.
Alternatives like, and so on. I don't too young or less focused on this top applications.
If you want to sell your application, or if you want to make a top and source.
[05:31]
But it sells your backend, and your application must look like high.
5 so qt. Usually looks neat and more enterprise ready, but actually taking accounts.
Their license. If you open source the application and use only open Source security confidence usually have no problems.
With that the May one of the main things perfectly works with 4 key screens could you absolutely, correctly works with their sizable windows this very important because some frameworks are wearing it until you start zoom in until you start resizing the windows Qta has got
commercial support, including lots of third party consulting companies.
So never be alone. Qt. Has got qt. Designer Qt.
Design studio, and 56 and Kml. Like, on markup language.
So you can choose either to do everything with mouse, or do we think?
[06:31]
And about question guys. Later, when I finish, okay and goody, 5 or qt, 6.
Now 55 nowadays, is still still popular because of the actually Kd.
The most well known open source player, and so, as they, slowly migrating to Qt.
6, and I believe in 2,024, when, like majority of Linux distribution, gonna be upgraded to new licenses, they will upgrade Qt.
To version 6. But now you got like in production people, you usually put version 5 is no problems.
Next. Sock your team rust. And they are like 3 big, well-known crates.
First one is retail. Is zoom. It has got the most direct buildings.
The next one is zoom at the object for us actually, if you met the object Rs, so it's more high level.
[07:38]
Create for Qt programming. And actually, when I started working with the objects was almost impossible to use.
So I will focus more on retail in this presentation, and the last one is 6, 60.
Maybe I'm wrong. But they started together with Zoom at the object, but after we decided to make on project.
So let's go next. Rustation should.
Now, and the interface basics you must learn about finance and slow.
This special mechanism of, or a data exchanging between, Qt.
Threats actually, Qt is very big ecosystem with with many stop.
But we will focus today only on interfaces, because I prefer doing everything in rust and to take only interface from Kuttin and doing some crazy mixes with this.
[08:42]
So there are no events in Russ like close events on windows, because there is no like classical OP.
So you must either use c plus plus wrappers, but, or in the majority of cases, you just don't need events.
Qtv. Because everything can be solved with it slots if you are right. Vi.
Jay for the fourth time. Avoid blocking their lives, threat with your heavy calculations, because it will be a login to your users will hate you if you are using Ross before.
Beware or auto drops of dynamic widgets by Rust.
If you create some, because when we just go out of visible sculptor like a cold sculpture, so must keep them somewhere, and c plus plus oh, sorry c plus plus knowledge can be bonus.
But it's not requirements personally about myself. I don't like C, plus plus I even hey, c plus plus.
But I I like could see, fortunately, is written in C, plus.
[09:44]
Okay, so sign on this is, what's a Z. I consider you can.
And like, imagine signals and slot like many to many channels, signals, and to final objects are not usually tried save.
But if you do, only emitted on sorry one moment.
Sorry I still have a cold, because my daughter goes to is going to school, and she is my personal.
Wire supplier. So I have called the whole winter so signals and slot you can move final to any threat and use emit function without any problems.
And usually people do like this. So you missed signals from other strategies.
And let's go next. And actually my days of love looks usually looks like the following like a single ui threat, and which send commands to workers.
[10:51]
And actually workers send back data. Let's speed up a little bit because we have limited in time.
So? Why do people still use 3 12 isn't all the same the most popular project, with no serious issues?
It has got the most complete buildings. It supports. Good designer forms.
Is supported with this it has got minimal rest of our hands, so if you have problems with it, goes to Google, you'll find the solution and you port it through always, almost no changes.
When Ray Telst''ll be with it.
You prefer to keep away from unsafe blocks in your caught sexually could use reason in C, plus plus unsafe somewhere in code, everywhere.
But other frameworks can hide this for you if you use cube.
Not only if you don't care about kitten knowledge base, if you need to.
This sixth support there is no retail, for could be 6 yet and here is a program example.
Let's go very quickly, so there is a program where a background walker increase control every second and pushes.
[11:58]
Actually, you can scan QR caught and look into source once the value is increased that they've been sent back to Ui threat.
At and us has got one reset button to reset this control.
They talk. We are standard draft channels, but worker threats use one empty like one null.
Could he sign out to notify Ui about new events in the this Ross channels?
So let's go to so we are creating channels.
So here, you see, we use unsafe synthes.
Center our emitter to another threat. So it's no problem to use, because it's officers shell cute today. So we construct Ui, we show it.
We sponsored our background background worker, executive application, and we quit.
So how does application look like usually? Is this ui form is actually retail alright? Well, it's good.
[13:07]
Where are you, tiny rascal? Written? But it does some interesting things like it cannot ui form for you, so as objects has only widgets itself counter, and one button to reset there is a struct for maintenance with window and actually today to
channels. And we can implement starting upcasting for our window to let Retail, make, slot for us automatically.
Otherwise we need to declare them as ras lodgers manually so let's go next.
If here is your implementation we create, you are on your object.
We lot everything. And we assign a this system unsafe, unsafe, unsafe assign our reset handler.
It's automatically met with a slot. No arguments from a rust function converted into CD slot by retail.
[14:08]
So let's go next. Here is an alternative slot implementation.
So you can just make it closure. You can put your cut and to have no agreement and have not even static capacity.
The player. And actually why Celsius, under R. C.
Counter, because in if in the closure you want to address yourself, you need to clone it.
But it's a single ui has got a single chat only so you can use or reference, count or not atomic.
So let's go next. Here is the worker, which actually increases listens to channels and send the data.
And after the data is sent and everything is okay as a data signal is submitted with empty events and how to handle data in Ui.
So we assign a simple function to this sign-on which is triggered one final is actually missing.
But after we use draft channels we are your full interactions.
[15:08]
Later on, and actually and toss our events and display.
What shall we do? So the last topic I want to mention how to distribute application.
We have cool create cargo, bunnel, which can do I don't know about Rpms, but they be on packages, of course, for Linux and also packages for always 6, and we have 5 before I car go weeks.
It's been in 4, and popular windows. Installation, framework.
So we can do everything directly from cargo. So thank you for watching.
You can download presentation, you can actually look at production application example, because actually, we use with our production application for our scanner platform.
Next time I will probably make a presentation about the platform. Okay?
[16:11]
Hello! Thank you. Thank you. It's fine.
So let's go to a question. Sorry it was a little bit longer than expected. Okay.
I think we have plenty of time for questions.
Okay, if someone want to see me, you can do it in record.
Because camera was working perfectly.
Oh, well, I'm not sure if that was recorded.
But never mind, so I'll go over the questions in most likely it's a most avoids fashion.
So first question is, did you conside or evaluate Gtk?
What made you pick? Qt. You probably understand that a bit in the presentation, but if you want to add something or make a short summary, you can.
Yeah, yeah, actually, I think it's worth.
I don't fly gtk so much when I started using Linux I switched to Kitty at Star, but now I use I-three.
So it has got like no framework, no dedicated framework.
[17:13]
And actually the second problem just because we either sell our applications or this application sell.
Other application, even they are open source. So we need to present enterprise customers.
The most I create the most neat interface I can have, and Whisko T.
Is early possible. So you can just close the source. You can paste some fee for commercial components.
It's or you can keep everything open. Source. But it's still.
Looks, very good, but actually is a hole of wire.
Why do you use whim? But not emacs? Why do you use like vice versa?
Just because I respect you, K. But I don't use it.
Sure, it's yeah, like you are. The speaker.
So we are asking your profile, yeah.
Yeah.
So next question is not exactly. Oh, well, it's a bit about so using.
[18:14]
Taui. I have a problem with transferring a lot of bytes between back end and front end, due to serialization. And this realization for transfer does Qt have these or the same problem.
I'm not sure about. If you wrap over some the objects, because it should be very little overhead, but like high level frameworks I mentioned, they offer you to use side of the system as it's but if you use rough signals, of course you can transfer everything you
are not limited to anything to transfer, so I.
Yeah, but I think Kt. Doesn't have the serialization part right?
So it operates.
No, no, no, there is no, unless you connect like your interface, written, and c plus plus as library.
So you need to kind of civilization, or like a stable Abi, to exchange data between.
Yeah, it's more like F 5, or functioning interface and centralization. I think right?
[19:14]
Yeah, yeah, actually, if you care about stable Abi, I have an experience.
We had like tried to exchange structural.
So it's a shared libraries. But we found message package fast enough in most cases, so don't wouldn't be afraid to.
Yeah, yeah, for Katie. You don't need any serialization.
Yeah, I think I think I think they have asked, because stories has some interest.
So next question is also about do you think power will replace electron on a market this time?
You don't need.
Oh, okay, okay, guys. At first, I'm.
The second.
I mean in feature, and and yeah, the second part of this question, which are the common cases for Qt.
Best cases for dowry. So a user asks for comparison.
Oh, yeah, sorry for Bacon, because I can't just answer on this question, because I'm not ui expert.
[20:33]
Okay.
The only electron I use is our studio is a Id for our language. And this is all I know about about electron, I never used to electronic production.
Yeah. So the next question is comparison with the Bassembly. You said that sometimes the top upsts require more access to the local machines and Webassembly, in which way raft can provide more access to the local machines.
Actually, it's a native application. You can write files, you can format your drive, you can.
I don't know. You can blow up your computer use SDK for that.
So you have no limitations. Just what operating system allows you.
So it's very.
Yeah, so given some big growth, yeah, I can add some ground for we Bostonly by itself doesn't have any system interface.
And if you want some server, for example, yc, which is by simply system interface, basically can handle files. And that's it.
And a little bit networking code, but even not the homeless.
[21:47]
Let's.
So let's go next. Actually, what I want to add, because usually we do, we do programs which communicate with USB a lot with non non standard protocols which communicate to several ports.
And you just have not alternatives.
Yeah, that makes sense. So next question is more close to Kt, why is there so many unsafe locks?
Who could say, do you opt in some more safe upstructions?
Yes, it can be wrapped and actually high level frameworks allowed you to hide everything in the background.
But keep in mind that are still unsafe blocks, actually like computer sounds like computers are unsafe somewhere near the processor is always an unsafe block.
Victoria.
Yeah, we know that, but, like everyone in rust, will don't want to write on. Say, walk in their day-to-day.
Yeah, I understand. I understand. I understand. But you have to.
Alternatives either use high level frameworks like you met the object, but you are limited in something, or you use directions, but sometimes you deal with on safe code.
[22:59]
Can you also show some slide with unsafe quote and comment like, why is it needed?
Yeah, yeah, it's very, actually, unsafe course are everywhere with method.
Let me are calling retail methods. There is no unsafe code like.
Like the.
So? Is there something like, Can you have connects here like these are a retail method.
Connect rather than oh!
You know, retail is automatic blending generator, because is there now a function?
Almost no function written in by hands. It's like similar.
With Amazon does for the Api, and so so you can't demand from people to who generated your billions for thousands of classes to make safe rapport.
You can do it actually by your own, if you need.
[24:01]
But look, I'm true like how what in this piece of code is unsafe and like how to make it safe.
Connect, connect, function is like native to the function is onsafe.
Okay.
So if you call external function in a strong library, it's considered to be uncertain by default, so we can make, of course, some wrap around.
If you'd like, use typical functions because because it could use a huge ecosystem, you use the power of it.
Someone uses another part of it. It's you can even I don't understand each other, because the next question I see How do you do work rounds continue not existing.
Our handling guys. I never like errors.
Non existent 50&nbsp;h. I'm not sure what you are talking now.
Okay, I have to say everyone is free to see the the next room, which is going to start soon.
[25:07]
There will be Andre secure call talking about using the bus and bleeds and backend. But you are also free to stay here for as long as Sergey is willing to answer questions.
Less. Thank you. Yeah, thank you for watching and let Uss at last finished with questions.
So about non-existent error handling actually actually been in their return kinds of hours, I believe, I believe, because I never had problems with that next.
What do you prefer to throw the alternatives like Tower Eagle, and so on.
Actually, actually, I'm wishing Iguya a lot, and I believe one day it will replace, like all and say frameworks.
But now like it doesn't looks like, because for a quarter there is a big benefit. It's safe.
It's written in Austin's, written by you like it's.
It's very good, but for users, user need to see forest.
[26:10]
What is used to see, and after a second something very needed, accurate, like, not made so quickly and by hands.
So let's go next our other popular project with open source.
We'll build this Qt. And Ross, actually, you can.
Oh, let's make a bit more yeah, so you can answer the expression.
If you have time, if you have time.
But yeah, we have time. I have just said, everyone who wants to be on the next talk, like, if they can already switch.
But we are here for half an hour at least, without issues.
Okay, okay, no. Problem. So let's go to next, we help Median core.
I can read it manually.
Yup, no, you stop it on other any popular projects is open source.
Yeah, yeah.
[27:11]
Yeah. The open source buildings.
So actually, you can, you can look in our application as oppressive.
Speak, spread a huge and sexual, over, written by maximum.
One and half people me into one. My colleague, and actually, it's really big, and it has got lots of interest in things like many non model windows.
So it keeps like normal windows and rask collection.
And actually, when we started to rise this application, we didn't know about trick with sign off a slot, and we used there is a more safe alternative you can use, but it's less faster. It's slower.
You can use Q-timer and the you could just react like 10 times a second to events.
It's usually enough for this top application unless you are writing some first personal shooter game.
But usually it's good. So you can just make a scheduler and toss your queue with events like 10 times a second.
[28:17]
So let's go next.
Yeah. The next question is, could rust and be built for Android?
If yes. Do you know an example?
No, no! Sorry I missed about the since the portal. I want to answer this.
Oh, sorry. Yeah.
Yeah, yeah, actually, where are very good question, because because in Katie you don't need to have a something, because there is no like real I/O Coo.
This threat is like, leaves, its own life.
It outputs everything on the screen. But in the background you can have Tokyo.
You can like. You can have everything guessing can exchange data is as a honest way.
And you can actually use a sync channels with a cross channels with a Ct threat is absolutely no problem to use.
[29:17]
Sounds good, so the next one could rust and kt are be built for Android. And if yes, do you know an example?
Yes, but for Android, actually, you need to. I will choose another frame, because lots of framework more safe and more android dedicated because don't actually don't try to make your application worse.
Hotel, because you'll get instead of 3 good applications.
You'll get one best versatile application. Because any like user application is also contains 2 powers, forces, backend, which talks with server backend, and actually hands the logic, and the next one is front, end which is displayed to user so you can have the same
backend, but different front tens and have everything upgrade. Like to provide big tables for desktop users and small button as small tables and big buttons for mobile users and users will yeah, love you.
[30:28]
Do you think? Do you know something in rust that is good for Mobile?
I know, on the flatter, and because Flatter was born to do mobile.
But I have no experience with that, because usually mobile application for mobile applications.
We use either like native languages, like or just web.
Yes.
Okay? So you already answered the question about our hands. I guess right.
Do we get to try? It assembles a bit. Elm like architecture, with comments and ui threats rendering data.
Actually, if we talk it about Qt, in general, it's a very big ecosystem which has got wrappers around system threats, wrappers around.
I'm not sure but maybe about around Filesystem.
So it was designed in days when, as it was only Java, so I'm alternative.
[31:33]
And was designed to make like applications which are not related to Java work, form machines to make them faster like they were compat toors in the sector of global cross-platform applications.
So Katie is very big ecosystem.
You don't write in good to you right like, in very modified c plus plus there's a lot of libraries, and so on.
So!
Yeah, they probably mean, like, when you are writing a kitchen, you probably don't use Qt threats and other stuff right?
Yeah. Yeah. Yes. Yes. Yes. Actually, what I want to say.
You have only one threat, because from you need only interface.
You don't need like. They local trace, or even they it's only sometimes a sign of to admit.
Tell your ui threat to display something actually just to my question, because, you guys, someone is asking to clarify to error handling question when you use Ct, just for interface, you get rid of 90% of errors we go use as much rust as
[32:52]
possible, and everything will be much better. So let's go next, please.
Kiki has its own types and strings. Y.
Ikti didn't have its own language. Well, this is very philosophical question.
The bigger because I am not jet brains.
They are not so ambitious. Then Brace will invite stream type and to make 2 languages instantly.
But it is a like, have they have actually not stable business, because changing to see us boards of directors.
And actually, people believe qt. 6 will be the last version of but actually.
Everyone wants everything busy. The last version in sense. You don't want to change everything in your programs.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, but but but never actually, this is a session. It's very similar to Java, because Java is that for 15 years.
But Java Cora still have lots of jobs. I don't think I don't even remember about cost, because in the you can make me loans nowadays, but it's complicated.
[34:06]
Oh, yeah, I think we have covered all the questions.
Yeah.
Okay, thank you. Everyone. Thank you for watching me. And let's go to other presentation, because everything is very interesting.
On the seventh. Thank you again, organizers, and sorry for my video.
Actually, we had a record in Wednesday, and I mean that recording was video.
But because my camera was working, okay.
Hey? Okay, yeah. Thank you. All. See you on the next talks.
So thank you. Goodbye.

=== ROW 286 | f015646 | https://youtube.com/watch?v=_-jBclcGiMY | 2025-03-21 | youtube ===
[00:02]
"Hello, friends. We are starting UАRUST Conference 2024.
The format of the conference is the same,
As it was last year, online. Last year
We have carried it out quite successfully. We had about
14 speakers.
Dim, you're on the frontside.
"I'm sorry.
Sorry. Let's start at the beginning.
The conference is held online, but we also have
Offline fan zones from which you can...
Offline fan zone in Kyiv, from which you can watch
Conference.
[01:03]
The conference was made possible thanks to the Ukrainian community
and organized by volunteer
members of the Ukrainian community
and support for multiple companies.
As Ukrainian a community, we have some
achievements, here they are listed on
in this diagram. This is the translation of the trustbook,
and the certification program and the bootcamp we run
twice a year.
And this is the conference that we
This is not the first time we have conducted it.
Us... The main communication takes place in Telegram.
There are more than one and a half thousand of us there.
I invite you to join if you are not already in the chat.
[02:06]
A few words about our values. It's mutual aid,
openness to an alternative point of view,
Cultivation of open-source culture and support
each other and a friendly attitude.
The last conference was held
Quite successfully, a lot of people visited it.
We raised $8,230 for
the needs of the Armed Forces of Ukraine,
Which, again, became possible thanks to your participation.
That's why we're holding this conference
Once again.
The only difference in this format is
What there is is a fan zone.
So far, we have raised $4300
And the fundraising continues. You can buy a ticket.
[03:08]
All funds for the tickets will be donated to the "Come Back" fund
alive."
And those who buy flowers,
will also receive records in the near future.
We plan to post these recordings,
але не
soon. So if you want to access quickly
to all entries and support our
Armed Forces of Ukraine, you have such an opportunity to combine useful and
nice.
And I also invite
you subscribe to Twitter, LinkedIn,
Maybe repost, maybe your colleagues
They will also see and join, buy flowers.
[04:11]
I think it's in our common interest.
Like I said, it's all possible because of the community,
friendly community, and somewhere
fifty activists who are actively
involved in the process of organizing this conference,
as well as supporting the world's
experts who Voluntarily
and took part in this
Conference. This year there are 16 speakers.
And, of course, sponsors and partners who also invested
in order for this
The event took place.
Among them are NIR.
[05:12]
NIR supported us last year and supports us this year.
NIR is a hub for developers,
that use the NIR protocol and build increments
for RAST and not only growth.
and also joined Kumek's sponsors
Tim. This is the official
Solana community in Ukraine. It combines
Rastro Solana-developers,
web trainers, investors, and it's
all for the sake of the development of startups and
Ukrainian business. Also Bohemia
Automation. Bohemia Automation is an innovator specialized
on Rastro development and in the field of IoT.
[06:15]
і Out The Box Systems,
A company that specializes in
Rust. Join Out The Box Systems if you
interested in Rust projects and you want to be a part of
a team that values innovation, vision and
long-term relationships. by format.
Format: 20-30 minutes for the main one
Of. During this part, the speaker
tells, the speaker tells That
what he wants to tell, and then from 10
up to half an hour, or even more, because we are not really limited.
The speaker answers questions.
As long as there are questions, as long as the speaker has the opportunity to continue
answer, you can ask questions.
We will try to voice as much as possible.
[07:17]
How do I ask questions?
There is a QA button at the bottom.
Through QA, you can ask questions. All questions,
please via QA. That is, the report comes out
from 30 to 60 minutes. Perhaps
some will last longer.
This year, since we have a little more speakers, we have two tracks,
every 20 minutes starts
New report. That is...
It turns out that you don't have the opportunity to listen
all speakers because they overlap. You will have to
choose. But those speakers whose reports
you won't get in, you'll be able to access
Record.
There will also be a break in the first hour
[08:21]
a small one for lunch and closing.
The last report starts at 4.40 p.m. and
closing at 6 to 6. I think we've already
Let's wrap it up. And after 6, autopathy begins.
in three cities.
First of all, Kyiv where there is a phonzone, where
Some people have gathered and will be from there
observe the conference. If you're not there yet, then please,
Join us, it's comfortable there, there's beer, there's a kitchen,
There you can chat with others once
Enthusiasts. And after six o'clock it will continue there
Everything is in the format of an autoparty. In Berlin,
here, and in Lviv.
Here are the addresses. In Berlin and Lviv, it's just autopaty
[09:22]
After 6 o'clock, 6 o'clock, there is no point in coming there.
After 6 o'clock, please.
Again, our main
communication is currently taking place in Telegram.
If you haven't joined the chat yet,
Please join us, we have a channel there.
All the announcements, some news of the world
rastu, communication, there you can always put
question. Please
Join us.
Thanks.
And now Let's
Let's move on to our first speaker.
Our first speaker is Maxim.
Maxim is
[10:23]
senior-level developer with
as much as seven years of experience in the development of
on Rust. It's astounding,
In fact, with so much experience, it is on the
There are only a few people to grow.
And what else can I tell you about Max,
that he, too, is a Ukrainian Rastivangelist.
He is actively involved in the organization and has been actively involved in the organization.
And he was personally interested in the first conference
several speakers. And in the second conference
And with
It is always pleasant and interesting to communicate with them. His report will be
on the topic of parsing the text for
with the help of SIMT.
[11:27]
Sometimes you need to extract a limited amount of information
from a large volume of text, and traditional libraries
Text parsing is not suitable for this task.
Because the combilator doesn't always optimize the code as it should.
And in this report, Maksym will tell you,
how you can optimize this process, how can you
maximum survive with the Compiler
from the processor,
from the iron you have and keep
Your client's funds.
Max, please.
Thank you very much, Kostya. Well, I don't
I know how much the maximum will be there, but we'll try to squeeze it out,
as much as we can.
[12:27]
My name is Maxim Vorobyov. I'm working
at Alicent Technologies. We are engaged in high-frequency
Trade. For Us
An important performance.
Today I'm going to tell you how we handle large
arrays of text and using Rust
We use Simt for this.
What is
Simt? Why was it invented in the first place?
How can it be used? Let's take a look at a few
use cases and there will be examples.
Let's dive into the code, analyze it superficially
some simt operations and let's see
what benefits it provides, as well as
[13:28]
Let's talk about why it's direct,
If you do, then only in rare cases. In which
We can use it, in which we can't. And so,
Drove.
First, what is SIMD? It stands for
як Single Instruction Multiple Data.
That is, we have ordinary operations
in the processor, they take on
input some data from some registers and usually it is
some one there are several numbers and they
Somehow, they do an operation. In Operations
SIMD The same thing is happening,
That is, this is some kind of operation, but a vector comes to the input.
This is how all GPUs work, but also
such instructions are in the CPU. In CPU
[14:28]
They're much smaller, these vectors, they're much smaller.
For example, we have here at the entrance
two vectors, and for each element
vector in two corresponding vectors X1,
Y1 there is one instruction. These instructions
occur at the same time, i.e. it is parallel
Computing a Rich Amount of Data
with the help of a single instruction.
There are instructions not only for two vectors, there are for three vectors.
In general, how to Why
Was it made up? It all started with Intel.
To process the video, he added special registers
MMXs, which were 64-bit. By '97, it was pretty big.
[15:30]
Regis Pentium
2 helped process the video so that it
didn't slow down, decode it. And very quickly
released an extension to this MMX,
because it was blocking the CPU,
That is, this operation was not performed in parallel with others
processor operations. expanded to
128 bits and also
added parallelism. That is, this calculation can
occur in parallel with how the processor processes
synchronous code.
This is how SSE was born.
The competition began in these years between AMD and
Intel. AMD has seized the initiative
and for the next 10 years he
[16:31]
developed his own standard, which was originally called
AMD 64. It is currently called X86
64, meaning Intel has already borrowed it
also to myself. But they have been used for a very long time
128-bit. And that's enough
Recently, we have 256-bit
10 years ago,
AVX.
After that, Intel tried to expand to AVX
512. Beginning with
Xeon, but they
spent a lot of energy and,
Accordingly, the CPUs overheated.
Accordingly, they had to Intel in some
processors even turn off. That is, for now,
in most cases, most CPUs support
[17:34]
256-bit.
In general, if you look at your code,
Like him, after he was compiled,
i.e. machine code, assembler, then you can see
that the compiler uses very often
these instructions, even the fact that you don't write such code.
Compiler still some operations If you see
MXMM registers, they're 128-sweat now, then that's going to be the SSE instruction. If you see
YMM, then it's 256-sweat AVX2 or AVX. And if ZMM, then it's 512-sweat.
Intel is trying to turn off 12-13 generations of processors.
They're trying architecture
[18:48]
so that it doesn't overheat, because when the processor overheats,
throttling is turned on, the frequency is reduced and
On the contrary, instead of accelerating, we get a slow system.
Rust works very well with Synth.
As I said, the compiler can convert for you.
This process is called vectorization. That is, you,
For example, you write some code, for example, you follow some iterator
and sum up the numbers. Most likely, your code
will be transformed in order for this computation to occur
on AVX or SSE.
In fact, by default, the compiler
uses SSE to cover more
the number of processors when you compile,
build with the release flag. In addition,
there is direct explicit access to
[19:51]
SIMD primitives. That is, you can write using SIMD instructions
in Rust. It's Unsafe. In the standard
library has an Arch module and there is x86-64 under
module.
If you're using it, then your code
will run on AMD Intel,
But that's it. That is, it will not be executed on other systems.
Also you can, as I said, since the compiler
compiles with us on SSE, you can directly
enable it to compile your code on AVX2,
That is, you will have the last generations supported
Processors. Usually in the area or laptops
They are all supportive. This can be done with the help of
RustFlex Compiler Flags, TargetCPU Native
[20:54]
or directly enable Target Feature
iron AVX2. Also at Nightly we have Portable
Synth.
By the way, yes, I started talking about it and
remembered that actually, if you use STD
Arch x86-64 and compile it to another processor,
In fact, it will be enforced, we will see it, but it will be
slow because on a different processor
doesn't support AVX, for example. This code
will be converted to sequential code. And so,
PortableSynth фіча в Nightly
Rust gives us the type
which is already built into the compiler,
Synth. It is very well integrated.
When this feature is implemented in Stable, there are a lot of cases
[21:57]
can be covered with a Safe code.
When do we need it?
Of course, if we process a large amount of data.
Usually, as I said, the compaller does
very good job and it's yours
The code is victorious. Especially in Rust and LLVM
He does a very good job with this. But in some cases,
You've got some can
be a task that requires
additional steps of almost elementary logic,
And then the compaller will not be able to cope with it.
For example, if you're counting the number of
words, we will see some instances where it can be used.
[23:02]
With this, you can make a code
such that it will execute even faster than it vectorizes
Compailer. But it's unsafe.
That is, you will need to spend more time
to test it. Addition
thanks to my reviewer Ilya,
He collected
list of libraries, with the help of
that you can solve even cornercases
99%. In our case, it is
doesn't fit, but I'd recommend it first
try to make your code like this,
so that it vectorizes. If that's not enough,
then you can use libraries.
For example, White gives the same sympathetic primitives
[24:03]
at the Safe level, but without a feature
of the PortableSimp flag, i.e. it runs on Stable.
CMMCHR helps with those cases that we
We will consider it now with the usecases. Also
for example, some libraries are widely used in PrtR matching.
Це Ahur Karasik в RegExp.
But I want to note that RegExp is very
slow looking at it.
Let's move on to our meat
Part. What we will
consider? There are so many cases
using SIMD, but we'll be looking at
some cases where we process large texts from data.
For example, if you need to get some statistical
information from the text, to count something, or to look for
[25:07]
some relevant patterns in the big
text document, or you're writing
some kind of parser that gets very
a limited amount of information from the text. That is, for example, if in
You're big JSON and you want to get
On the other hand, your code will be
Very fast to work.
If, accordingly, you write a custom parser,
In our case, we'll look at two examples,
hide the number of words and how many times a certain
The word is present in the text. I'll also show you
One example of how this helps us for
parsing JSON. And yes, let's get the first
example. We're going to count the number of
[26:07]
words, but in order for the code to be
you have a better understanding, we have limited time,
I'll make some assumptions. We're only going to count the number of whites
and postponements.
In principle, in most cases this will correspond to the quantity
words, maybe there will be a little bit of
error, but if we have a large text, a large number of
information, a small mistake, it is acceptable.
And also we will not take into account
UTF-8.
So, I'll ask you again.
Let's take a look at what it looks like on our
Rust if without using any
[27:09]
Libraries. Our code is very simple, very clear.
That is, we have the countSpacesIter function.
I do inline-never accordingly,
so that the compiler doesn't optimize outside of
of this function.
And we're counting
we go all over the U8 slice,
because we only work
With ASCII, it's acceptable. And we're counting
Number of spaces or new ribbons.
That is, if our symbol matches, then we have
will be bool true, convert to one and then sum up the quantity
Units. If we look at
AVX code, it's already much bigger.
The first thing we will see is that we use it directly
[28:11]
what I was saying is the x86-64 module, and the M256 it already tells us that we are using
256-bit AVX2 register.
AVX,
AVX2 is different
operations only, i.e. AVX2 more operations are supported.
Then, with such a signature, we always go
Operation. That is, in
us with what register
Is the operation working? 256, which is AVX.
What does it do? Comparison. And what a
Source?
What is the significance
on the way out. Here we are going to use three operations.
How will it work? First we are, well, the same
Signature. What are we going to do?
We will follow the text, but we will no longer follow the
[29:14]
symbol, and we will break it into slices of 32
bytes so that one slice fits into the
Case. And we will compare such slices
with our search query. Our search engine
query is each character will be or space,
or a new tape. And at the output we have Intermediate
the result will be a bitmap, a bitmask,
Where our gaps are soaked, there we will have
units. We will simply summarize them later.
First, we prepare our request and we already see unsafe.
Our feature is labeled unsafe as well.
Although, in principle, I made sure that everything is safe here.
So we are the First,
We will prepare our search queries. We are filling out
the entire register. Set1 multiplies this
[30:15]
space in the entire reregister, i.e. 32 bytes.
We will also prepare two requests.
Then we're alain'
our buffer. to register
256. Why is this happening?
The processor works with memory in such a way that, firstly,
it is loaded into the CPU cache, then it
gains access. Next, if you have a case
256 bit, but this applies to all registers, then your
the data must be entered into this register,
so that you can download faster.
That is, all memory is divided into levels
intervals that start respectively
with the same
Intervals. That is, for example, if we use 8-byte
[31:16]
registers, then we will have 8 bytes of alestates,
and, accordingly, your memory area
should, your address that I'm showing,
It should be divisible by
8. Accordingly, 256 bits,
then it should be divisible by 32. There are surgeries,
that allow you to download without allayment,
but they are slower.
In addition, an additional
fiction here, if we go to
32, we have Level 1,
the first level, which is closest to Core,
to our CPU cache, it's usually
64 bytes, and if we share
memory to our addresses,
of our slices for 32, we can download two
[32:16]
Slices in one row
пам'яти, кешу, L1.
The corresponding download always takes place in one operation,
that is, when you download some number
з пам'яті, з раму,
everything around is loaded,
so that the number enters, respectively,
64 bytes, you have this minimum download operation
up to L1. And we'll fit
In L1 there are 2 slices.
But we're throwing away That
What was at the beginning and at the end, what doesn't fit into us.
That is, there will be up to 32 bytes in total.
Well, it's not a big mistake, it's acceptable.
Next, we go through these slices.
[33:17]
Because of this, I said that, in principle, it can be labeled
as a safe, as we use the
Embedded
Since we're using iteration, she'll already make sure
that we will not go beyond this slice.
That is, we will have here
always access to memory,
that we own. That is, in principle, it is
safe. What do we do with each slice?
Compare with search queries.
At the output of the M1, it will be 32
Bytes. That is, we are operating here with 32-byte
registers, each operation accordingly gives us 32 bytes.
But we want to count the number.
[34:19]
32 байти,
they're going to look like where we had a matching,
There we will have 0xff, that is, the entire byte will be
occupied by units.
First of all
We're adding this M1 and M2, so it's there,
where we found the gaps and the new tape,
And after that, we transform our
32 bytes into 32 bits, i.e. there,
where we have a byte in full in one,
255 number, there will be one bit. And then we
We use Count Once. By the way, as I said,
This operation is performed on arithmetic
processor cores, that is, it runs in parallel.
Count once –
[35:21]
This is already an operation with a regular case, that is, in fact
these operations, as well as loading slices into memory,
They will be carried out in parallel on our
Processor. That is, here we will get, as well as sadness
Final. That is, here we will get more
More parallelizations. But I wanted to show more
What the Memchr code looks like.
That is, it is very simple compared to ours.
And we will see that, in principle, he is behind the performance
It also works well. Let's take a look.
How it actually works for us.
That is, I wrote a small
an example that will iterate on a large scale
[36:21]
A file is enough. We have a 100 MB file.
Conventionally large, it's a wiki. Export from wiki. And we
saw that we have a 28 ms iterator,
наш AVX 47 мс і ММСЕЧР 12 мс.
That is, the MMSECR is very fast. But like I said,
There is... What is the mistake here? I'm on purpose
so compiled. Since we've compiled on
a common processor, usually Rust
doesn't use AVX because it's
limits the number of processors we cover.
In order to see how AVX will work.
But you can see that this code worked. He worked slowly.
If we compile to our AVX, then accordingly
[37:22]
we have Our solution, in principle,
7ms, almost the same as Memchr.
We already have a much more iterator...
Sorry, this is not an example.
It just shuts me down a little here, so I don't
See.
You see, my subtitles are closed.
That was a spoiler.
That is, we can see
that we have Our
[38:22]
The example works twice as fast as MemcHR.
memchr actually worked like this in this case
just like an iterator. But next we'll see what it is
This is not always the case. And also
I wanted to show you
which I was talking about at the beginning.
If we compile our iterator into natives,
that is, to our current processor, then we have,
Accordingly, the main part will look approximately
Yes, that is, it is the same code. We can see that in
we use both XMM and YMM, i.e. and SSE,
That is, he
divides into slices and, accordingly,
because he needs it, he cannot reject as we reject,
with our assumption. He's on
[39:24]
makes the most of all the possibilities.
That is, where possible, it is 32 bytes,
where it has a smaller slice,
It has a 16 byte operation. This is the main
cycle, there is still preparation and completion,
That is, there is also a synchronous passage along the tail.
So, let's look at another example.
We'll count the number of words,
the number of times the word. The Word Meets
in the text. For our
iterator it's again
A fairly simple solution. That is, we accept
buffer and word. And then we
We move a slice the length of our word and
Let's compare it with this word. And we count
[40:25]
the number of times it was soaked. If we look
on AVX... Yes, here I will now increase again.
If we look at AVX, AVX is much larger by
this time. That is, the code is more complex. But I've highlighted
the main function. What does it do?
We have some kind of search query. That is, it is
In this case, we have 32
The numbers are multiplied by 256. That is, we have
the vector that ours was 32 bytes,
mi matchimo 4 characters at a time.
If we take the same approach as we used,
We will match one symbol at a time, we will have a lot of
Positives.
And a lot
[41:25]
will be false positives at the beginning of the word. That is,
For example, we are looking for the first letter, there will be a lot of
triggers. In order to
To reduce this likelihood,
We're going to use the first four characters.
Accordingly, there will be such a restriction that we support
only Words that are more than four
Characters. Four or more. That is, we will have this
query. That's eight numbers
four bytes each. And the same
In fact, there will be an algorithm, but there will be four characters at once.
And immediately we can say what the problem is here, that we
We took, for example, a slice of 32 or 35 bytes, we soaked
4 each, but we need to it.
[42:25]
every time this search query,
poke it in three more times to soak it
The exact beginning of our word is somewhere in this slice.
To do this, we can no longer use aligned slices,
To do this, we use the loadU operation.
It will download the unfinished slice
to the register. Next, we use the same comparison,
But on the way out, we will already have
respectively, the same 32 bytes,
But where we've soaked, we'll have
all 4 bytes in units.
And then we move that to a 32-sweat
mask, in U32. And we
We do this with scrolls throughout the slice.
That is, we need to make sure that we can in this buffer
[43:27]
Move at least by
3 bytes further. That is, this buffer must not be the size of
less than 35 bytes.
We mourn, then we mourn these masks
And then we return
Our matching. Basically,
the rest of it is more or less
No magic.
The matching will take place as follows. Here we have a search engine
request, we have some kind of mask,
We soaked. In fact, our mask is upside down.
That is, what corresponds to the beginning, it will be at the end
of our mask.
Let's prepare our first request. We have the beginning of the word,
[44:27]
4 first bytes. We will prepare a request.
Load it into the register. Then we move on
on the windows. With us
window, it's 32 plus length
of our word. That is, these are additional. And we're pushing
These windows are not one by one, as we put in
iterator in a regular one, and 32 bytes at once.
This is our vectorization. We use our
function and next we have to see if there is a match
some in a mask. If it's there, then we need to make sure
that the last part of our word also corresponds.
That is, we find all those positions
where we had a match.
Next, we compare after
After this position, as we found, we compare
[45:27]
with the last part of the word. If there is a matching,
then we add one. Next, we pull off our mask and
Let's look further all over the mask.
That is, there may be several matches. Further everything
Clear. And if you look at
on the MEMCHR code, it's very simple.
That is, in fact, this library is just
That's what it's done for. This is the main use case
for this library. As we have seen,
She doesn't perform the previous use case very well,
But this use case... Yes, I am now
I'll make sure...
So, we have comfort.
I will search in the same text.
I will search for the word volt.
[46:31]
You've already seen it. That is, our
acceleration works almost as fast,
like MEMSY ECHER as they worked on this library much more
Longer. I think they are this case
Even better, somehow optimized. But we're in
20 times faster than vectorization
on RAST.
Well, I'm not going to translate the code JSON
because it is very complex,
But in principle, they use those
the approaches themselves. I've brought
Here is an example of a comparison, as from our performance tests,
on a small message, 107 bytes,
We are already getting more than twice.
Compared to a simple scraper. That is, we get two fields,
Two values from two fields
[47:35]
JSON.
This advantage is greatly increased
for large messages. That is, if you get a few
kilobytes or a hundred kilobytes JSON,
then this advantage sometimes reaches 100 times.
Since you only got two fields, you don't parse
Fully. In this case, I compared
Also not with JSON parser.
Jason himself JSON hearts, for example, he will show here
400 наносекунд.
SyntJSON as a rate,
which is Synt, it will also be slow, it is 100,
because they parse the entire document.
This is a comparison with a NOM parser that
also a library that is adapted specifically for parsing
text, which also gets only two matching
[48:36]
words, ale all one our synth
Faster.
I wanted to repeat right away, that is, this
This can only be used if you
It is very necessary. As we go to Unsafe here
Code, most of the time we have a compiler
Covers. Seven gives us much more
Less readable code. We need to cover
additional tests. And, basically,
maybe in one percent of cases it can be
use. But we process
large arrays, it is 20 times for us
saves cloud-cost, i.e. we are much
We process the text faster, with our archives
[49:36]
We work and, accordingly, much less
We pay.
And it also provides
We can react faster. That is, in our lieutenant
Decreases.
Basically, that's all I wanted to say.
If you have any questions... Yes
Now let's see. Thank you all for your attention.
I hope it wasn't too boring.
Hello on all. Yes
Igor, hello. Maxim
Thank you for your report.
I have to go for the next session.
That's why I'm leaving Igor. Igor conducts a QA session. With us
A lot of questions. Here are 8 questions for you so far.
It's nice for everyone to stay.
[50:39]
Thank you, Kostya. And who is interested in tokenization,
then I ask you to join the next report, which begins
after 3 minutes.
Yes, thank you, Konstantin. And thank you, by the way, Maxim Fedorovich, for this wonderful
Presentation. We have a lot of cool questions from the audience,
And I'll start with an interesting one. A question from Julia.
Can explicit use of Cinda if it is used
Is it incorrect to give the opposite effect and increase the execution time?
Well, of course. First of all
You've seen what's going on
When to compile to the wrong target
CPU, right? That is, the operations will be
performed, but if you
compile to SSE, for example, then AVX code
compile on SSE, it will even
[51:43]
look worse
nirje sauce
vectorized code. But if you're writing
this code, you use you
compete with a very large development team,
thousands and thousands of very smart people,
that write the compilers that write these optimizations,
that is, you need to be very
confident in what you're doing, what your
There will be an advantage over them.
Your preference is that you have some specific
use cases, and they cover common use cases.
But I want to say that in most cases,
what they did,
LLVM combinations, wedding somies,
how Rust converts code, it will work
[52:44]
better than your custom one, unfortunately.
On the contrary, not unfortunately, it is very good.
But if you know what to do, it's
can be done. I hope it fits.
Here's another question.
The question is as follows. When compiling to a different architecture, when using
CD Arch, you said that factorization is being removed. A or
There will be other optimizations that will soar, specifics for
that architecture?
Yes, I'm trying to figure it out now.
Okay, I'll ask you a little bit. When we compile
not under,
e.g. ABX 2, and whether there will be
optimization for MMX?
If we're compiling simt code,
[53:44]
or if we wrote
simt code and it uses directly
operation AVX, for example,
in this case, it will
will be compiled, rather
That's it, I don't know for sure, I can't tell you if it will use
MMX, I think it will, Why not
No, but in the compiler, when you write
code in such a
styles that you directly say
he doesn't know what to do with each register, he has a lot more
fewer opportunities to optimize your code. Than if
you're using some iterator-type primitives,
which is provided by the language. That is, you
You already directly indicate how to perform the operation.
When you use an iterator,
[54:45]
You, basically,
describe your task more. You declare,
what result you want to get.
With the direct use of these primitives
You write how to do it. That is, it cannot optimize
Her. As he
doesn't know, maybe you really wanted that kind of consistency.
It cannot change the sequence of these operations.
And because of this, in principle, even if
it's going to use MMX, it's going to execute
slower than if you were to write a generic
code. I would also add,
that in such situations,
If you know how to implement
its operation for a large SIMD, it's also
can speed up a smaller SIMD. That is, if you
[55:48]
you can do the speed under AVX512, then it
will also run faster on AVX2.
Why? Because the accumulator will not have a dependency
between different operations. That is, if operations can be
done in parallel, it speeds up operations, even if they are not done
у SIMD.
Yes, it's very clear. Yes. And one more thing
Such a very interesting question that is now appearing in chips
NPU. And how can it be used more conveniently?
I haven't worked with NPUs, I can't say
I haven't even seen any special
for this in Rust, in Rust
Some primitives appeared in the library.
I think you have to rely on it
the first to the compiler.
[56:49]
Just in this case,
maybe LLVM can already
to use it somehow. It's optimized already
for respectively
matrix computing, i.e. I
I think that it is narrower than the range of tasks.
But I can't answer that question here, sorry.
Thanks. It's not too scary, it's a little
parallel to Cindy, but concerns
yes. Such a question.
How the portability of using Cindy is implemented and what's going on,
if the processor doesn't support Cindy? Will there be an error?
As we have seen, there will be no error, but Again
[57:50]
two cases. When we write general
code and we compile it for some kind of target, we have
Always Compiler If
the compilation went through if there was no compilation error,
then we can be sure that this code will be executed
without an error on that target CPU,
which we asked. If it can't compile on
our target CPU, if some instructions are not supported there,
then our compilation will fail.
Conversely,
if we've optimized the code and written some
Primitives, they're backported
to other processors. But like I said,
It's not optimal. Thanks
thanks. There are two questions here.
[58:52]
What is the maximum file size?
Is there a size limit
File? Is there a relationship between file size and
time for calculations?
Usually. Here we have a linear relationship,
Since this operation we are moving along the slice.
We have a corresponding linear dependence on the
the size we are sending.
What's in it for? If we have the code written
super-optimal, And we compare it
with code that doesn't work optimally. For example,
It works twice as fast.
If we process
file 100 MB in 7 ms optimal and in 14 ms
not optimal,
[59:54]
We have a difference of 7ms.
But if we increase the size a thousand times,
Accordingly, we will have 7 seconds and
14 seconds. The difference is no longer 7 ms, but 7 seconds.
That is, this is our speed
at times, not by some.
Therefore, as the size increases, this distance of our
optimal code from suboptimal code, it increases.
Great, thank you. Here's how we
generally do from align to 256 bits and
How does this happen in practice?
Well, actually, as I've shown,
There are primitives for this,
respectively, in Rust.
We've got the instruction, we've got it
[60:57]
call on the slice, align to,
and indicate to what type. In fact, there may be i64,
Then we will have
Accordingly, some kind of tail and head
And in the middle of this buffer, it's over.
What's the secret here? Our Buffer
can start with an address,
For example, from one.
Our Memory Downloads
in the L1 cache processor 64-byte
strings that start with an address,
which is divisible by 64. That is, when we download,
For example, our slice starts with 1,
we load this slice in
[61:57]
There is no longer one byte of us. If it starts with
63, then we'll load 63
bytes that are useless are useless to us, and only
One byte will be in the cache loaded, which is useful.
Firstly, secondly, if we download the
slice into the same case, then it happens
rather, because the CPU doesn't have to cut
and compose in order to be loaded into the register.
Accordingly, we do this alignment for this. That is, this
The buffer will be divided into three slices. The first is
the head is ejected to
the first address, which is divisible by 64.
Next comes the main body,
and then the tail is thrown away, which remains,
[62:57]
that doesn't fit into 32
Bytes. Okay, thank you.
Or maybe there are some allocators,
which allow you to do it right away?
In fact, we may not even be allocator
use, we can describe our type as follows
so that our
The data was immediately leaked.
That is, if you, for example, make a vector
From this data, the vector with
M256E, they will immediately be varnished in their original form.
Each type of lesion has an allyment. And if you have
will be such a vector with M256EI,
Will it mean that we have it, can we use it
[63:57]
How is the byte vector? We can,
Of course, Since it's,
well, at the lower end
It's all a byte vector, it's a slice of bytes.
We can turn it, for example, memtranspute into a slice
bytes, of course. But in this case, I think
that we could take here right away
zaalainenyi slice.
And one more question. Did he observe
You're having memory problems after...
That is, you have an original algorithm that works serially,
and did you observe any problems with working with memory when you implemented the SIMD algorithm?
Watched. Yes, of course. What was there?
For example, before I started using
[65:01]
iterators, I used just
cycle, respectively,
I followed the index. That is, he took
Pointer went to this buffer,
added to this pointer 32.
And, to be honest, there was a case when I
just went beyond this slice.
This, I think, will be just such a general one
error when you
For example, you use an operation like this,
This is where the Pointer is transmitted. And you
You need to be sure that there is enough in this point
Bytes. According to this pointer, you will
Your data structure. She's the owner of it
array of data. It's unsafe here.
[66:02]
Territory. And you need to be convinced of that.
Because otherwise... It will load,
It will do it, but maybe you have this slice
only half occupied with your information, and the other
A part, some kind of coat of arms, well, nothing will happen,
but you get undefined behavior,
You get an unpredictable result, you will jump
this account. Well, in this case. There may be
Worse cases if for other operations.
Yes, thank you. But in some situation, you develop code on
special laptop, and the laptop doesn't support AVX 512, and you
Do you want to run this code on the service, is there such a possibility?
Of course, that is, you are compiling on a laptop,
but you don't
You will be able to check the performance.
If you know what you're doing,
then you can
[67:07]
write code. It will work,
If it works, you'll need to compile it already
on the AVX512 and check the speed there,
where this AVX512 is supported.
What's more, for example, if you compile
on AVX512 and run on some processor in which,
For example, the 12th generation, the old one, in which
AVX512 available, undisabled.
It will warm up in a second, and this code will be
very slow. If newer,
there or somewhere in the region, then he
will work, maybe,
Longer. Well
thanks. Well, the last question from the audience.
How To Add A Lot Of Flourish Faster
64 or make the product of Flourish 64, the product of vectors?
[68:09]
That is, I think these are two questions. Yes.
Add all Float64.
We have 800 items. And with that, Rust
will do very well with an iterator. That is, we will have
The code looks something like this.
For example, we have some kind of slice.
And we
We'll get it at the end.
It's actually very simple.
This code will, I think you won't be able to
Write more optimally.
Here it is worth adding, for example,
LTO and Target CPU. Yes, of course, when you compile,
[69:12]
you will need to register Rust Flex or Target in Cargo
CPU.
and also optimizations all that are possible. But with
with such simple cases, you don't need to get into SIMT.
I don't remember if he has an umul.
Maybe not. You can make a reducer or something similar.
I'm not sure if in this case
there will really be good code. You have to watch it.
[70:14]
Order of Operations, Additions, Fleets,
it produces different results.
On the contrary, if you make an explicit singe,
This can speed up the code a lot.
A copier won't be able to
make the optimal addition on its own.
Really, really. It can
be, yes. I didn't think about it.
It may be, yes. Must see.
For each architecture, this answer will be different.
And you should always do a benchmark, and you should
look at the assembly code that lurks there. That's the only way.
Those are golden words, yes.
I would also like to ask such a question, but how
do...
[71:14]
As far as I understand, you are working on HFT systems.
Yes. And there's an important lieutenant there. And how cindy influences
On Leitens vs. Non Cindy Code?
I can say that since
These operations are performed in parallel, then, in theory, Leitensi should
be smaller. That is, it is
It is also necessary to test everything accordingly.
Simdicode will still be used in our country one way or another.
That is, even if we compile,
Our compaller will do it anyway. Here is the question,
Which output simt code will be faster?
Your simt code or the one that the compileer will do?
Therefore, we have no alternative here, but we have
[72:15]
Processor U Processor
There is a module for predicting operations. It is in accordance with
lays out at home, builds a plan in advance,
how it will perform operations. And he has
Each core has several computing units. That is, we
can execute synchronous code and
Downloads from the
memory and, accordingly, some
mathematical operations of SIMDA. On each
processor it will be different, it all depends on the architecture,
That is, you need to watch. Such a general
answer. We are accelerating
processing of large JSON,
Accordingly, we have latency
decreases very much.
[73:15]
This is probably the greatest effect we have in
compared to other optimizations, as it is
the main thing we do. Okay, thank you.
And, probably, this will be the last question. Is it possible
to do if there is already a ready-made solution to desterilize the file,
using SINGI? Does everything even make sense?
That is, here
question... In fact, there is
libraries that, when it comes to
JSON, if you want all the information from JSON,
I would use this as such a rule,
If you need less than 10%
information from
of this file, then you can give it a try.
If you want all the information, so much the better
use, for example, SimJSON, which parses
[74:17]
all JSON. If you parse...
This library is very well written.
If you write your
JSON parser on SIMD, then you can look at it right on SIMD
JSON Crate. It's big,
that is, and he has been for a very long time,
Accordingly, he had
A lot of iterations, that is, you have to go through all this.
It's just a matter of de-realization, it's a general one.
We're talking about optimization
and parsing. We cannot give such a general question.
Here we need to look at specific situations, at specific tasks.
Thanks. It was a great presentation, great answers, great questions. Thank you to the audience for
question. Thank you all very much.
Join the next presentations. But it's
[75:18]
It's coming to an end for us. Thanks

