=== ROW 71 | f012048 | https://filtra.io/rust-quadratic-aug-24 | 2024-08-21T00:00:00 | twir-links ===
filtra.io | Building A Spreadsheet in Rust with WASM and WebGL
jobs
blog
post
Building A Spreadsheet in Rust with WASM and WebGL
This is my interview with David Kircos, CEO of Quadratic. They're heavily using Rust to build a highly performant, web-based, programmable spreadsheet. I'm really intrigued by the workflows that Quadratic enables, and I think they're on the forefront of some exciting trends around web applications. I enjoyed talking to David. He has a great way of explaining some of the technology trends we talked about. To see jobs available at this and other cool rust companies, check out our extensive rust job board.
Want to advertise here? Reach out! filtra@filtra.io
Drew: What’s the elevator pitch for people who haven’t heard about Quadratic?
David: Quadratic is a technical spreadsheet with support for Python, SQL, and JavaScript. Quadratic lets you use AI to write those languages. The vision for the product is to let people analyze data the developer way and share it the spreadsheet way. One of the huge benefits is being able to use a lot of the amazing, open source data tools that exist in the Python and SQL communities while being in a familiar spreadsheet environment.
Drew: I imagine this idea grew out of something you experienced personally. What made you think to build this?
David: My background is in finance. I also wrote software to help venture capital firms like Techstars keep track of their finances. So, my stack was Python for analysis, SQL for retrieving data, and spreadsheets as the interface to communicate results to my team. All three of those things are just working with tables of data. So, it feels like they should have worked well together. But that’s not the case. I spent a lot of time gluing all of those pieces together rather than solving the specific problems I had. So, the idea was just to bring these separate tools together to work on the same table, and let users choose the tool they need on a cell by cell basis.
Drew: That makes sense. With the little bit of analytics that I’ve done, it always feels like you’re extracting data from a table into some other modality only to recreate the table and then exfiltrate the data back to another modality where you create yet another table. So, skipping that repeated reconstruction of the table makes a lot of sense.
David: Yeah, that workflow is so common: select data with SQL, analyze it with Python, and display it in a spreadsheet. So, in Quadratic, you can do that entire workflow in one tool.
Drew: When I was researching your tech stack, it sounds like a lot of the really cool things you are able to do are made possible by a couple of really cutting edge web technologies that you’re using. Would you be able to give an overview of your stack?
David: A big part of the initial thesis for Quadratic is that the web platform has changed. In an early blog post, I actually called it Web3! (laughing) Crypto isn’t necessarily an evolution of the web, but the browser has really taken a step forward. Nowadays, you could build a competitor to Adobe in a browser. I don’t think anyone thought that was possible five or ten years ago. And, at that time, it wasn’t. By the way, that’s kind of what Figma has done. So the technologies that enable that are WebAssembly and WebGL. These give you the ability to control exactly how data is laid out in memory and exactly what’s drawn to the screen. So, instead of being limited to HTML elements, you can build any application. For example, people have compiled Windows XP to run in WebAssembly and WebGL. So, you can even run a full operating system in your browser. We felt this set of tools was particularly useful for a spreadsheet application because we could actually build something more performant than existing spreadsheets and have that pinch and zoom, free-panning experience. With the previous iteration of the web, you had to choose between the distribution of a website or the performance of a native application. Now, you can have both.
Drew: One of the parts that was so interesting to me is the distribution piece. Is the distribution so much better because you as a developer basically just need to target the web platform and then can run anywhere that the web platform runs?
David: Yeah, the distribution is superior because anyone can put a URL in their browser and open one of our spreadsheets. They don’t have to download our application onto a system that they know is compatible. You can see with Figma how fast these things proliferate. In Figma, someone can just build something and share it with their coworkers. When you try to share something in Adobe, you often discover that once you’ve shared a file, your coworker has a two hour install process before they can open the files. So, that’s what I mean about getting superior distribution. Anyone can open a Quadratic file and immediately be in our high-performance, native-like application within four seconds on any platform.
Drew: Yeah, that makes so much sense based on my own experience with Figma. I know Figma has a desktop app, which is probably Electron.
David: Yeah, it’s Electron. So, it’s just their website wrapped.
Drew: Okay, yeah, because I’ve really only used Figma in the browser. And, there isn’t really a performance difference that I’ve noticed from the browser to the native app.
David: Yeah, the most popular desktop apps today are almost all web apps packaged for desktop with Electron. That includes Slack, Notion, Figma, and VSCode.
Drew: I imagine in the early days it's not really a priority to do Electron… Have you done anything with it?
David: We did actually have an Electron release early on, but we realized it was going to be too difficult to maintain it while shipping features with the velocity we wanted. So, we discontinued it for a while. But it will be back sometime later this year or next year.
Drew: We’ve pretty much covered the topic of WebAssembly and WASM, but I do want to ask one more question. One of your blog posts said that you think these technologies are bizarrely underdiscussed, which I definitely agree with. Why aren’t they being talked about?
David: I say they’re under-discussed because usually, when there’s some new technology, people get very excited and talk about it a lot. Even if it doesn’t have a bunch of obvious, immediate applications. We definitely saw that with crypto. But, for whatever reason, WebAssembly and WebGL have not been hyped in the same way. I think that might be because they’re actually not that useful for most applications. For example, if you’re building a CRM or something like that, there’s just no value. You have to have an application where you need a very particular interface that’s hard to build with HTML or you need an extremely high level of performance that isn’t achievable in standard JavaScript. And the performance in JavaScript has become amazing, by the way. So, that’s a high bar to clear. If you think about something like Figma, obviously, the interface is highly nuanced, and the graphics rendering really matters. For example, doing a transform across a bunch of elements could be done much more efficiently if you could control memory. In a spreadsheet, you have similar problems and constraints.
David: I think the other category where we’ll see this a lot more is games. For example, Unity is being ported to WebAssembly and WebGL. Other engines are being ported as well. So, you can actually finally make really great games in the browser without using Flash. Beyond what we’ve discussed, there aren’t really that many applications that have this set of requirements. But, I still think they’re incredibly exciting and should be discussed more.
David: I think one other exciting application will be AI models. For example, Google announced that Gemini is going to be running in the browser in a web worker. So, I think we’ll also see new technologies that require a lot of local performance come along and provide new use cases.
Drew: It’s interesting to think about smaller AI models running in a browser context. I don’t know everything that needs to be in place for that to work, but it seems like if Google is interested in it, it’ll happen. They’re basically in charge of browsers after all.
David: Yeah, I’m not sure if it's going to be WebGPU or WebAssembly, but I know that will be in an upcoming release of Chrome.
Drew: This is off topic a bit for our conversation, but have you heard about some of the efforts to run WebAssembly on the server as a way to simplify virtualization? Do you know much about that?
David: Yeah, we haven’t really done much with that. WebAssembly itself is a portable compilation target, and that’s been a sort of holy grail for a long time. People have always wanted basically a portable binary that could run on any system. So, yeah, people started thinking it could be really great for server architecture. There’s a lot of excitement around that, and I would say that the enthusiasm there might even be a bit ahead of the use cases. One of the interesting ideas is to have applications run in WebAssembly on the edge. This will be really useful for things like multiplayer rooms. So, those are things where you need a server but want fast back and forth with the end user.
David: As a paradigm, WebAssembly on the server is just such a far step away from something like Docker. Docker has an operating system, which means I can use packages that expect that Linux is available. WebAssembly is not that. People have tried to emulate parts of a system with things like WASI. But, this is all pretty outside of what I know a lot about.
Drew: Yeah, I wonder about it. As you said, there’s a limited set of web applications that can benefit from WebAssembly. But, those that can benefit see huge advantages. On the other hand, if WebAssembly were used heavily as a target for backends, it seems like that would give at least an order of magnitude increase in adoption and usage.
Drew: I think I understand intuitively why you would want web assembly to perform operations efficiently on your spreadsheet, but I’m not sure it’s clear to me why you need to draw it with WebGL. Why take that step?
David: Yeah, the Quadratic spreadsheet is drawn like a tile map, similar to Google Maps. So, we draw the entire thing in WebGL. All of the interactions are done in WebGL as well, including clicking, moving the mouse, resizing, and so forth. The reason we do it that way is because we can put it on a canvas where you can zoom out and pan smoothly. So, it’s really about navigating larger datasets easily. With our goal of bringing data science tools into the spreadsheet, we anticipate people wanting to bring bigger datasets in as well. While it may never make sense to bring a billion rows into a spreadsheet, I can see the case for bringing in a million. So, being able to navigate that easily is important. The navigation on current spreadsheets is very chunky.
David: So, a simple example of the interaction this enables is that you can put a huge dataset in quadratic and zoom out, finding what you’re looking for from a distance and then zooming back in.
Drew: The other thing I was curious about from the WebAssembly perspective is the fact that you’re using Rust to target WebAssembly. That seems to be kind of the way to do web assembly. Is there a reason people don’t use other compiled languages more? I know there are the general reasons why anyone would want to use Rust for a new project, but is there something specific about WebAssembly and Rust?
David: So, lots of people do use C++. I believe Figma is mostly C++. There are a lot of pre-existing graphics applications in C++, and I think in part they wanted to take advantage of those. They actually originally compiled C++ to Javascript. So, I would actually say that overall there’s probably more C++ compiled to WebAssembly than Rust. But I do think a lot of greenfield projects are choosing Rust. And maybe that’s just because it gives them an excuse to use Rust. (laughing)
David: There are two primary reasons we chose Rust. The first is that Rust cares a lot about program correctness and stability, which is super important in spreadsheets. The second thing is that Rust attracts great talent. So, being a Rust product differentiates us as an employer in a way that appeals to great engineers. So, it’s been a hiring advantage and a product quality advantage.
Drew: I hadn’t thought about the correctness aspect as it relates to spreadsheets. But, it makes so much sense. So many businesses run critical business processes off of some spreadsheet.
Drew: On the note of the hiring advantage, have you been able to parse out why these really great engineers seem to be drawn to Rust?
David: I think talented engineers see Rust as this language that forces good habits and good code. It’s maybe more of an ideological thing for them. I think good developers want to write great code no matter what, and they see Rust as a tool to help them do that. Rust just embodies correctness in a way that's very different from something like C++. At the end of the day, C++ doesn’t really care if your code is right or wrong. Rust, most of the time, tests aren’t even required. If it compiles, it’s probably correct.
Drew: We’ve talked a lot about using Rust on the frontend. Do you use it on the backend as well?
David: Yep, we have a number of Rust services that we run on the backend as well. That’s one of the areas where Rust has really demonstrated its value to me as someone that’s built a lot of Python and Javascript APIs in the past. For example, the Python and Javascript services I’ve created in the past tend to crash and cause problems. On the other hand, we’ve launched our Rust services and basically never thought about them again. Mainly, you don’t get the runtime type errors because that’s something that Rust explicitly protects against.
David: I also love the fact that using it on the backend and frontend means we can share code. For example, we have this core spreadsheet library that runs in the browser and on our servers. It’s the same exact code.
Drew: That’s the second time I’ve heard someone mention that benefit. The other company was amo, a consumer social startup in France. They’re building mobile apps, and they share a lot of code. I think a lot of it is reusing types. So, that seems to be a benefit people are realizing.
Drew: I’ve heard some people express frustration about ecosystem maturity when it comes to using Rust for web backends. Have you had frustration with that at all, or has it been smooth sailing?
David: Well, I’d say it’s been smoother than Javascript. Particularly, tools like Express seem to surprise me with how immature they are. For example, we use Typescript. Express doesn’t have good Typescript support.
David: As far as Rust, we use Axum with Tokio. It's been plenty stable for what we need. And, it does seem like the community is actually coalescing around these packages. When we got into Rust a couple of years ago, things were a little more scattered. There were more competing ideas. But, things have really stabilized in the last little bit.
Drew: It does feel like the pieces are coming together. One of the pieces of Quadratic that was interesting to me is that you’re running Python in the browser. That doesn’t sound straightforward. How did you make that work?
David: There’s a compilation of CPython to WebAssembly that’s pretty well maintained. I believe the Mozilla Foundation is in charge of it. So, we use that to run Python in Quadratic. We chose to do that all in the browser, because its faster for most spreadsheet-size workloads. In most cases, there’s no waiting at all. It also comes with real benefits for us as a company. We don’t have to worry about spinning up and spinning down servers that are running untrusted, user-written code. And, we don’t have the costs that would be involved with that. This is one of the big reasons we’re able to give out a free version of Quadratic.
David: I will say the Python experience inside Quadratic is kind of Python lite. You can’t use arbitrary packages, and you can’t use super compute-heavy packages either. So, we are working on an enterprise code runner that will enable those things. So, that’s coming but for most cases we think in-browser is the way to go.
Drew: I hadn’t thought about the simplicity and efficiency it brings for you as a company.
David: Yeah, and the other thing is consistency. If something runs on my computer, it’s going to run for you too. We’re literally running in the exact same environment. That’s cool because consistency across environments has always been a pain point of sharing and working with Python code. We want people to just be able to use code to work on data and not think about configuration.
Drew: Yeah, I’m very familiar with all of the Python package management and environment pain. Along those same lines, this requires you to build code editing capabilities in your app. If I were to make a list of things that sound challenging because of the spread of desired features, I feel like code editors would be near the top of that list. How have you broken down that problem?
David: People would probably think of building a spreadsheet and building a code editor as two big, daunting tasks. Quadratic is kind of both of those things. But the real answer is we’re basically not building a code editor. The code editor is Monaco under the hood. That’s the same code editor that powers VSCode. We are building an IDE that’s focused on data analysis. So, we actually have done a lot of work to get the language server, syntax highlighting, and all of those sorts of things. But we’re not taking on the code editor itself.
Drew: The audience for these interviews is technical, so I try to mostly ask technical questions, but I can’t resist asking one strategy question. So, almost every business either uses Microsoft Office or Google Workspace, both of which come with spreadsheets. So, what’s your plan for convincing people to shell out for an additional spreadsheet?
David: I think if Quadratic is compared to Excel or Google Sheets as a line item in the budget, we will lose. Why add incremental cost for a spreadsheet, right? So, we’re focused more on business intelligence use cases where the fundamental problem is that you have some data and you want to analyze it and distribute that knowledge to a team of people who are familiar with spreadsheets. So, I think we can win if we’re being compared to something like Metabase or Tableau. As a result, our focus has really been on not just rebuilding Excel. I think if we just rebuild Excel with Python in it, that’s a failure. We want to create the best tool for working with data, and we happened to pick the interface that most people in the world are familiar with.
Drew: That makes a lot of sense to me, and my intuition tells me this is a strong approach for that.
David: The other key piece is that we’re the only spreadsheet that’s actively targeting technical people. There’s like fifty million technical people out there, and Google Sheets and Excel do not speak the language of technical people. We’re really trying to serve those people by making Quadratic comfortable for them to work in. And, I think in general developers are willing to adopt any tool that makes them more productive.
Drew: Obviously, I love that. As a technical person, I always feel like a second class citizen in other spreadsheets. So, are there any use cases you’re particularly excited about?
David: Yeah. I mentioned that the idea for Quadratic came out of my experience working in finance. A lot of our early users have been in finance. So, that’s been an exciting vertical. There are so many people in finance who are good at spreadsheets but maybe want to pick up Python and SQL. Or, they’re good at Python and SQL and need to collaborate with people who only know spreadsheets.
Drew: So, the other thing that I’ve been impressed with about Quadratic is that it seems like you’ve got a great team. And, I know you’ve been thoughtful about creating a really specific team dynamic. Can you describe what it’s like working at Quadratic?
David: The Quadratic team is very technical, and it's just a group of people who are generally really passionate about building great software. We’re basically all generalists. Most everyone on the team can write both Typescript and Rust. And, as I said, we’ve really focused on hiring people who have a passion for creating great software, whether that’s super smooth user interfaces, highly efficient algorithms, or really robust services.
David: We’re mostly a hybrid company. So, we work in person some of the time and remote some of the time. In this environment, it’s really important to find people who are self-driven to achieve results. We’ve been lucky to find some great people early on, and then I think teams with great talent tend to attract more great talent. So, it is something that you have to get right very early.
David: I think since I’ve been here writing code since the beginning, I’ve been able to set the tone for Quadratic to have this very technical, product-focused culture.
Drew: So, do you feel like you’ve gone slow to go fast as it relates to your hiring?
David: Well, the market for talent has changed dramatically since we started Quadratic. And, our ability to attract talent has also changed quite a bit. When we were hiring our first engineer, it took us like three months for one hire. It was hard to find people who wanted to work at Quadratic, and it was even harder to find people who we thought would be a great fit as the first hire. Because that hire was really great, they’ve attracted other great talent. Then, as I’ve said, the talent market also seems to have flipped on its head. When we first started hiring, the people we were talking to were getting multiple very good offers. Now, we’re seeing more people sitting on the market for a bit. I’ve also seen more people who are purely interested in working on an interesting project versus getting paid as much as possible. The days of job offers just escalating and escalating seem to have ended. The hiring market today is probably the best I’ve seen in a long time for startups.
Drew: Yeah, that tracks with everything I’ve seen. Before we wrap up, is there anything else you want to mention?
David: Well, the roadmap for building a spreadsheet is very long. We’ve been building for two years now, and it feels like we’re finally at the point of having something useful. We’ve launched SQL and database connections and will be adding more over the next couple of weeks. And, in the last couple of months, we’ve launched real-time multiplayer, JavaScript support, and charts and graphs support through popular libraries like Plotly. Also, the performance has dramatically improved. So, it’s been an exciting last year for features. Going forward, we’re excited to focus on building the business.
Drew: That’s awesome! I’ll be looking forward to your SQL release and everything else that the future brings.
David: Thank you for taking the time to formulate these questions and think about all these things.
Drew: Thank you for chatting!get rust jobs on filtra
Know someone we should interview? Let us know: filtra@filtra.io
sign up to get an email when our next interview drops

=== ROW 72 | f012231 | https://blog.rust-lang.org/2024/11/26/wasip2-tier-2.html | 2024-12-04T00:00:00 | twir-links ===
The wasm32-wasip2 Target Has Reached Tier 2 Support | Rust Blog
Rust Blog
Rust
Install
Learn
Tools
Governance
Community
🖌
Light
Dark
System
The wasm32-wasip2 Target Has Reached Tier 2 Support
Nov. 26, 2024 · Yosh Wuyts
Introduction
In April of this year we posted an update about Rust's WASI
targets
to the main Rust blog. In it we covered the rename of the wasm32-wasi target
to wasm32-wasip1, and the introduction of the new wasm32-wasip2 target as a
"tier 3" target. This meant that while the target was available as part of
rust-lang/rustc, it was not guaranteed to build. We're pleased to announce
that this has changed in Rust 1.82.
For those unfamiliar with WebAssembly (Wasm) components and WASI 0.2, here is a quick, simplified primer:
Wasm is a (virtual) instruction format for programs to be compiled into (think: x86).
Wasm Components are a container format and type system that wrap Core Wasm instructions into typed, hermetic binaries and libraries (think: ELF).
WASI is a reserved namespace for a collection of standardized Wasm component interfaces (think: POSIX header files).
For a more detailed explanation see the WASI 0.2 announcement post on the Bytecode Alliance blog.
What's new?
Starting Rust 1.82 (2024-10-17) the wasm32-wasip2 (WASI 0.2) target has
reached tier-2 platform support in the Rust compiler. Among other things this
now means it is guaranteed to build, and is now available to install via Rustup
using the following command:
rustup target add wasm32-wasip2
Up until now Rust users writing Wasm
Components would always have to rely on tools (such as
cargo-component) which target the WASI 0.1 target (wasm32-wasip1) and
package it into a WASI 0.2 Component via a post-processing step invoked. Now
that wasm32-wasip2 is available to everyone via Rustup, tooling can
begin to directly target WASI 0.2 without the need for additional post-processing.
What this also means is that ecosystem crates can begin targeting WASI 0.2
directly for platform-specific code. WASI 0.1 did not have support for sockets.
Now that we have a stable tier 2 platform available, crate authors should be
able to finally start writing WASI-compatible network code. To target WASI 0.2
from Rust, authors can use the following cfg attribute:
#[cfg(all(target_os = "wasi", target_env = "p2"))]
mod wasip2 {
// items go here
}
To target the older WASI 0.1 target, Rust also accepts target_env = "p1".
Standard Library Support
The WASI 0.2 Rust target reaching tier 2 platform support is in a way just the
beginning. means it's supported and stable. While the platform itself is now
stable, support in the stdlib for WASI 0.2 APIs is still limited. While the WASI
0.2 specification specifies APIs for example for timers, files, and sockets - if
you try and use the stdlib APIs for these today, you'll find they don't yet
work.
We expect to gradually extend the Rust stdlib with support for WASI 0.2 APIs
throughout the remainder of this year into the next. That work has already
started, with
rust-lang/rust#129638 adding
native support for std::net in Rust 1.83. We expect more of these PRs to land
through the remainder of the year.
Though this doesn't need to stop users from using WASI 0.2 today. The stdlib is
great because it provides portable abstractions, usually built on top of an
operating system's libc or equivalent. If you want to use WASI 0.2 APIs
directly today, you can either use the
wasi crate directly. Or generate your own
WASI bindings from the WASI
specification's interface
types using wit-bindgen.
Conclusion
The wasm32-wasip2 target is now installable via Rustup. This makes it possible
for the Rust compiler to directly compile to the Wasm Components format
targeting the WASI 0.2 interfaces. There is now also a way for crates to compile
add WASI 0.2 platform support by writing:
#[cfg(all(target_os = "wasi", target_env = "p2"))]
mod wasip2 {}
We're excited for Wasm Components and WASI 0.2 to have reached this milestone
within the Rust project, and are excited to see what folks in the community will
be building with it!
Get help!
Documentation
Contact the Rust Team
Terms and policies
Code of Conduct
Licenses
Logo Policy and Media Guide
Security Disclosures
All Policies
Social
RSS
Main Blog
"Inside Rust" Blog
Maintained by the Rust Team. See a typo?
Send a fix here!

=== ROW 73 | f012293 | https://users.rust-lang.org/t/why-do-some-people-confound-t-with-stack-memory/123336/8 | 2025-01-08T00:00:00 | twir-links ===
Why do some people confound &[T] with stack memory?

@SebastianJL · 2025-01-01T13:59:56.338Z:
Hi guys
A question just popped into my mind and I was wondering if anyone else was thinking about this.
It seems like I am seeing this particular misconception from time to time on this forum.
Vec<T> saves its contents on the heap, while the contents of &[T] are on the stack.
The second part is not true since the &[T] doesn't care where the memory it points to lives.
For example
let owned: Vec<i32> = vec![1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6];
let borrowed:  &[i32] = &owned[0..5];
borrowed will now point to heap memory, not to stack memory because Vec allocates on the heap.
Now I wonder. Where might this misconception come from? And do you also see it from time to time or is it just me?

---

@BurntSushi · 2025-01-01T14:12:56.546Z:
I usually read it as, "Vec<T> puts its contents on the heap, while &[T] may be on the stack."
It's easy to miss typing "may." It's hard to say whether that implies a fundamental misconception or if it's just imprecision of language. It may be a mix of both.

---

@kpreid · 2025-01-01T15:05:29.030Z:
Yes, I see things like this occasionally. I think there are these factors in play:
When references are first introduced, all the simple relevant examples demonstrate borrowing values that are on the stack. So, one can think “& is for borrowing data from the stack”.
A common error is to try to classify all types into “types that live on the stack” and “types that live on the heap”. If one tries to apply this incorrect model and hears that ”Vec<T> creates a heap allocation and &[T] does not”, and one is not yet practiced in  distinguishing between a pointer and what it points to, one could conclude that &[T] doesn't ever involve the heap.
In my experience, (2) itself — stack types vs. heap types — is a more generally common confusion than this particular one about slices.

---

@user16251 · 2025-01-01T16:59:12.170Z:
To complicate things further:
The compiler is allowed to elide heap allocations.
The compiler can transform code where references are taken into code without; code with &x might be compiled to something that only ever stores (values related to) x in registers, or might eliminate x entirely.
There are other kinds of memory besides stacks and heaps (e.g. a memory-mapped file).
async functions blur the distinction between stack and heap; a future might be created on the stack but later pinned on the heap.

---

@quinedot · 2025-01-01T19:36:02.164Z:
I always thought The Book's explanation of ownership was a bit "stack vs heap" heavy.  For example:
types such as integers that have a known size at compile time are stored entirely on the stack, so copies of the actual values are quick to make. That means there’s no reason we would want to prevent x from being valid after we create the variable y. In other words, there’s no difference between deep and shallow copying here, so calling clone wouldn’t do anything different from the usual shallow copying, and we can leave it out.
Rust has a special annotation called the Copy trait that we can place on types that are stored on the stack, as integers are
They haven't talked about references yet.  The "stored entirely on the stack" phrasing is probably because their goto non-Copy example is String.
The next couple of pages then introduce references and slices.  They do correctly demonstrate a &str pointing into a String's data.  But they don't talk about Copy and they don't talk about stack-vs-heap structure any more.  Even though, say, a &str and a String have very similar structure.  They should talk about why &str is Copy despite being structured like a String.
(&mut _ and reborrowing is a bit more complicated.  But deserves to be talked about too!)
I don't know if this is the source of much misunderstanding, but I have always thought the heavy emphasis on the heap was a bit weird.  Maybe the slice section could also be extended with some summarizing examples and explanation, like a shared slice pointing into static memory, an array, and some heap data.

---

@user16251 · 2025-01-01T19:59:29.867Z:
Why introduce the stack at all? The quoted text is inaccurate (integers can be stored as the elements of a Vec, or in registers, etc.) And [u8; N] is Copy even for large N.

---

@quinedot · 2025-01-01T20:04:16.656Z:
I think because they talk about how stuff in functions go out of scope, but that's just me trying to read their minds.
Your point about types not caring where they "live" is also a good one.

---

@BurntSushi · 2025-01-01T20:17:55.101Z:
Also, there is often a trade-off between accuracy and education. For example, when I correct my toddler that the Sun is actually not moving, but we are rotating. That's wrong, the Sun is moving, but arguably less wrong than his impression. (I once tried to give him the full explanation, but halfway through he ran away to play with his trains.)
Not that readers of the Rust book are toddlers, but the principle generalizes in my experience.

---

@StefanSalewski · 2025-01-01T20:41:41.601Z:
user16251:
The quoted text is inaccurate
Unfortunately that book had a lot of inaccuracies, and at least one year ago they typically refused to knowledge and fix it. I found that a bit sad for such a popular book. But now they have a new, friendly maintainer, so it might make some sense to post these old issues again. For example, after one year, and after some others have confirmed it, they finally acknowledged one of my reported issues -- an issue that have been there for 7 years at multiple locations :-). See  Wrong use of the term "shadowed" · Issue #3773 · rust-lang/book · GitHub

---

@akrauze · 2025-01-02T21:43:50.013Z:
This is beautiful! I've nominated this for the quote of the week. Hope you don't mind.

---

@system · 2025-04-02T21:43:56.176Z:
This topic was automatically closed 90 days after the last reply. We invite you to open a new topic if you have further questions or comments.

=== ROW 74 | f012336 | https://youtube.com/watch?v=NclcQcNcLI4 | 2025-02-05T00:00:00 | twir-links ===
[00:04]
Okay, so welcome
hello and welcome. That's what I wanted
to say.
Uh to the
Code Maven meetings and and the Code
Maven YouTube channel if you're watching
in in in this in the video.
If you're watching, please like the
video and follow the channel before I
forget.
Uh my name is Gabor Szabo. I
myself teach Rust and teach
Python and help help companies introduce
testing and CI.
Uh and I think sharing knowledge is is
really important. I've been organizing
various meetups for more than 20 years
now. Um um
mostly in person, but the recently I
started this this uh
idea of of inviting people and sharing
their their knowledge and I'm really
happy that uh it's thing it's still it's
it's uh starting to take off.
So if you have any idea that you'd like
to present to uh the audience, then
[01:06]
you're welcome to connect contact me and
and we can discuss uh
a presentation. And this time we're
going to talk about Rust and um embedded
Rust and uh
Mao I'm going to give the the
the
place for for Mao and he'll introduce
himself in much better than I do. Uh and
thank you for coming and uh thank you
for watching the video. So that's that's
now your turn.
Uh and just before I I finish this, so
if you are here in the video in the in
the meeting, feel free to ask questions.
That's one of the nice parts of uh
participating in the in the event that
you can ask questions in the chat. Um
and then stay around
uh discussing things. So
Mao.
Thank you, Gabor. Um I'm going to share
my screen. Let me just make sure
everybody can see it.
Um just uh make sure everybody can see
the screen.
Uh yes, we we
Can you see the presentation?
[02:06]
I can see the RV embedded yet.
Yeah, okay. Perfect.
And and yes, I would I wanted to say
that we we saw this we noticed this at
an earlier meeting that some
reason the the slides weren't followed
well by Zoom. So, please mention when
if you feel that it's off.
Okay.
Um, okay. Hi everyone.
Uh
Welcome to the presentation called Are
We Embedded Yet? Uh this is the the
story of my little journey to implement
a a tiny HTTP server on a
microcontroller.
So, who am I? Uh hi, I'm Maor. I'm an
electronics engineer and a maker.
Uh I currently work for Arbe as a
digital design engineer.
I've been doing embedded um hardware
design, logic design for the past 11
years, and I got interested in Rust, and
I decided I want to try and add it to my
uh toolbox of knowledge.
So, what are we going to talk about
today? I hope you're seeing the first
[03:07]
slide right now with the agenda. Yeah?
Yeah.
Okay, perfect. Uh what are we going to
talk about today? We're going to do a
quick run through about what are
microcontrollers. Uh we're going to talk
what is the challenge with using Rust in
the embedded environment. Uh we're going
to look at the use case I was trying to
create. Um
what's the process was to create the the
drivers and the tool set to actually
make it work.
Uh what is the build environment usually
use? How do you debug code? And we're
going to look at a bit of uh demos.
And once we finalize all that, we can
talk about conclusions.
So, what are microcontrollers? Uh
microcontrollers are compact,
self-contained computing devices. They
consist of the processor, memory,
peripherals, and sometimes specialized
hardware uh to do specific things like
for example USB controlled cameras,
displays, and it's all integrated into
one single chip.
Usually we use microcontrollers when we
need something to work uh as real-time
[04:09]
operations. Most of the times you take a
microcontroller and you run pure code on
it without an operating system running
some kind of just while loop or an
interrupt driven loop, so it will do
actions depending on for example if a
button is pressed.
Or in other cases that are also super
common, you use something called a
real-time operating system uh which lets
you create somewhat something equivalent
of threads. Um but they are very
deterministic and you can know exactly
when each one will run.
They usually also designed for low power
consumption, so you most of the things
that use batteries would use
microcontrollers.
And yes, they're everywhere in every
almost every uh electronic product that
isn't using some form of an advanced
processor would probably use a
microcontroller.
So, what types of microcontrollers are
there?
There is a huge variety and it's a
constant battle between getting the most
[05:10]
performance or the lowest power or the
cheapest price.
Um even if we look for example at
architectures, there are so many
different architectures that are still
being used today. Uh if for example we
look at 8-bit architectures, we can talk
about Arduino for example, which is
its own architecture called the AVR.
Those are the original ones, not the uh
modern ones. Uh we can think about the
8051, which is super common to see in in
more like uh industrial electronics.
Uh in the 16-bit world, we have for
example the MSP430.
And of course in the 32-bit world, we
have the ARM, which uh the M-series,
which stands for microcontroller.
We have risk-5, which is now starting to
become much more popular uh
in actual products. And we also have
MIPS, which you can see in some older
generation of microcontrollers.
Um
the amount of memory we usually have in
[06:10]
these in these microcontrollers is very
small. You can see examples that can be
as low as 8 KB of flash memory and 512
bytes of RAM and sometimes even lower.
And even to this day, you can still buy
microcontrollers which are one-time
programmable. And they can be as cheap
as 3 cents.
Okay, that's great and all.
What about Rust?
So, let's talk about what is the chat
main challenge with doing Rust with
microcontrollers.
Uh
most microcontrollers, if not all of
them, implement
a single memory space for everything.
Which means your code,
all the peripherals, RAM, everything is
mapped into a single memory space.
That means, for example, if you want to
blink an LED, you need to write or read
from a specific memory address
in the memory space.
[07:10]
Why is that such a problem? Well, that
essentially breaks a lot of Rust's
memory safety concepts.
And we can see an example of that if we
look at a single example. Just making
sure everybody is seeing the table that
says SysTick.
Yes.
Okay, perfect.
Okay, no glitches so far. That's good.
Um so, every ARM microcontroller has a
small piece of hardware called the
SysTick,
which is
a counter that can count clock cycles.
You can use it to calculate a small
delay or
to count to count elapsed time.
And the way you do that is this
block has four registers that you can
access starting at a specific memory
offset. And as you can see in this
example, three of these registers are
read-write register registers and one of
them is a read-only register.
Um
[08:10]
So, okay, let's let's try to implement
it in Rust.
Um so
the first thing we do we say, "Okay,
let's write this as a
It's not clicking.
Is the What's going on? Oh, sorry.
So, I say, "Okay, let's let's implement
it in Rust. So, let's write a struct
called SysTick which has four
four fields, one for each one of these
registers.
The size is 32 bits.
And we'll use a special uh
a special
um a special thing about the the struct
to tell Rust to not try to uh
uh break down this struct or as in to
keep it in the same style as C, which
means that these four registers are or
four fields are essentially a continuous
piece of memory.
Okay, now we have the struct that
represents this the structure. Um how do
we actually use it?
[09:11]
So, this is a This is where
unfortunately we need to start using
unsafe code.
So, to do this, we need to take the
memory offset that we see here, the 0x
uh E E 1000_E
F10,
and cast it as a mutable reference to a
SysTick struct, and then give a mutable
reference to that as is object that we
use.
Oof, that's yeah, that's that's a
mouthful.
And to to make things even worse,
um
Rust and like C C does this as well,
with because uh you don't want the the
compiler to optimize out these memory
accesses, you have to do this uh reads
and writes in a volatile fashion. And
doing these accesses in a volatile
fashion is also unsafe code.
Which means in the just these
[10:11]
six lines, we uh had to use unsafe
constantly in order to access something
that is a very basic part of our code.
Okay, so this is obviously very very
uncomfortable and obviously we don't
just want to put unsafe on the entire
code and just keep going. So, what do we
do?
Well, one example that we can do is
um
create um
a struct which um
holds a static uh reference, a static
mutable reference to the actual register
block, and hide all the unsafe
operations behind functions that we
present to the user.
When we do it like this, it means that
as you can see here under the uh
under uh in the function called example
usage, the user no longer has to uh
write unsafe code, which means us as
crate providers can handle and make sure
that the unsafe side is perfect, and the
user doesn't have to actually run unsafe
code on his own.
This is great and all, but uh what about
[11:12]
the borrow checker?
So,
um we can look at that at uh the
embedded C idea
and say, what we usually do in C is say,
let's just make this a global variable.
Uh let's hold a a global struct with
this um thing we want to do.
Um but the main thing is that when we
write this in Rust, we're essentially
writing a static mutable object.
And to access static mutable things, it
is an unsafe operation.
So, we got nowhere.
So, what do we do? Um
the developers of uh the the embedded
Rust board group have thought of an idea
of uh representing each one of the
peripherals as uh a singleton.
Which means that you take the peripheral
and you wrap it in an option.
And when you want to use that
peripheral, you essentially take it.
And by taking it, uh the the inner of
the option becomes none.
Which means the next time someone will
[12:13]
try to take it,
Okay. So, now we have this basic tool
set which allows us to actually access
peripherals and use it in some form of a
safe fashion and getting some of the
safety capabilities of Rust.
Obviously, we don't want to just go now
and write every uh register block inside
the chip. It can have hundreds of, if
not thousands of, registers that we need
to write. Uh what do we do?
So,
um
the methodology that usually is done
when it comes to the embedded world is
to use something called a hardware
abstraction library.
And the way that um the embedded Rust uh
implemented this is by uh taking uh a
special file called an SVD file, which
is a file that usually is provided by
most microcontroller vendors, which
contains every peripheral and the
[13:14]
addresses and all the fields and bit
width and everything that each part of
the chip has.
And they created uh a a translator which
takes this file and converts it into
Rust code. Or more specifically to
something called a peripheral access
crate.
This creates all the necessary templated
Rust code um to access each and every
one of the registers and fields in the
chip.
And what we do above that is that we
um can create something called a HAL
crate. So, a HAL crate allows us to
instead of using uh
for example to uh read the sample uh
from the ADC where we'll have to write
all these like I don't know 15 16
registers just to configure the ADC, we
can create a a a piece a function which
allows us to initialize the ADC uh and
underlying it uses a peripheral access
crate
to do all the code.
One more above that is something called
a board crate. So, for example, if we're
[14:15]
using a specific PCB
which has uh let's say an LED connected
to pin eight of the microcontroller,
um you can describe that as an
abstraction which says, "This is the red
LED on the board." And when you control
that, you underlying it goes and
controls pin number eight and blinks it.
Um obviously, this is this the the this
conversion part of the SVD which saved a
lot of time is obviously written in
Python.
So, let's talk about the
Let's talk about the use case I was
trying to make. So, it seems like
embedded Rust is going to be very
interesting. So, I wanted to see uh if I
can get the
three core values
uh implemented in an actual embedded
project. So, I wanted first of all to
see that we use,
which means that I can actually use
Cargo to uh save me from writing a lot
of code blocks, which again, working in
the embedded C world,
[15:15]
you find yourself copy and pasting
because there is no actual
ideal method of sharing code.
The second thing is size.
Obviously, we're using uh a much higher
level language than C, but it was
important to me to see that
even in this uh case, it can fit in
small in small microcontrollers.
And the third thing is safety. I want to
show that
uh the Rust compiler helped me avoid any
funny business.
So, what's the task?
Uh I'm trying to implement a web server
on an STM32.
Why do I want to do that? Um usually,
when people create these embedded
projects, they uh provide with the
project these archaic GUIs they wrote in
a horrible language called C#. Um which
uses this proprietary protocol uh to
communicate with their uh with their
[16:15]
product. And that's the only way to work
with it. And if you have the wrong
version, it breaks. And
And obviously, if you don't have the
right .NET drivers, it breaks. Um so,
it seems like the most viable idea is
why not provide the GUI with the
product?
So,
let's try to do that. The main issue is
though that the microcontroller, which
you can see on the right on my finger,
um has no networking hardware.
It has no file system support. And it
only has 128 KB of flash and 40 KB of
RAM.
To top it all off, um
because this microcontroller is this
small,
um what you usually do is you have to
use something called no standard. So,
Rust provides a lot of uh a lot of
utilities in its standard crates.
And because these are usually rely on
some other underlying like requirements
[17:17]
of the operating system and sometimes uh
uh can take a lot of space, uh we can't
use that.
So, this strips a lot of basic things
such as even using panic or using vec,
we can't use it without actually
providing some additional resources that
we need to add to our code.
The biggest implication though is any
crate that we want to use also has to
support no standard mode.
So, how are you going to do this?
Um
we're going to use the USB interface of
the microcontroller to essentially tell
the computer that this is a USB to
Ethernet
dongle.
Using a something in the USB standard
which is called a CDC NCM.
After the computer thinks that the
connected device is a
is an Ethernet device, we will add to
the microcontroller TCP IP stack which
will let us send um basic protocol
messages
[18:19]
to the USB interface.
And finally above that we will create
two sockets in the microcontroller. One
is an HTTP socket so we can serve the
website and handle get and post requests
from the from the client. And we'll also
create a DHCP socket which will allow
the microcontroller to give the computer
Kind of like this. So, each one of these
gray
gray cubes is a
is a
a crate that I ended up using.
Um and the blue ones are things I had to
write.
Um so, for example, you can see here
things such as the HAL as we talked
about a moment ago.
And
Mora just sorry, just a second. There
was a question you had. Can you do you
do heap allocation? No I see the
One second.
Um about heap allocation, yes, we
[19:19]
actually have a slide about it. So, once
I get there, I'll talk about it.
Um
Yes.
Um
Okay, so as you can see, a lot of the um
the the right side, which talks about um
the actual peripherals of the
microcontroller, we're luckily
um standing on the on the shoulder of
giants that have did the effort to make
all these great possible. And of course,
uh the TCP/IP stack um
using something called small TCP, which
is a no standard uh TCP/IP stack.
Um so, how does this actual interface
looks like?
First off, we need to write the
the CDC NCM driver.
So, this is something you take from the
USB spec uh about how you're supposed to
provide the computer the information of
this is a CDC NCM device,
um what's its MAC address, um
what connections does it have.
[20:19]
Uh so, that is the first phase.
Afterwards, um
you will now start getting a data stream
coming from the USB port. You need to
write an API handler to handle the uh
traffic, which we want to convert to
Ethernet packets and vice versa.
And the packets come in small chunks uh
because this is uh uh a USB 1.1 device,
it only provides 64 bytes each time. So,
we need to essentially buffer and slowly
parse the messages, and this luckily was
done using a concurrent queue.
Which lets essentially buffer a set of
uh of uh messages and only handle them
later.
And
on the TCP/IP side, uh small TCP uh
abstracts away the idea of an interface
to providing uh what it calls TX and RX
tokens. So, you you need to provide an
implementation for handling
uh when the the small TCP requests a TX
token or wants to consume an RX token,
[21:21]
uh you need to provide that interface.
The way I did it is by creating another
concurrent queue,
uh which means that uh the the small TCP
can deposit or pop
um
prepared messages for him to for it to
parse
or send away. And
I can handle them in a separate place
cuz again, the the USB side I can only
Um
So, how does this uh environment look
like? What what do we need to actually
compile bare metal code
uh for for uh using Rust? So, first off,
we need a cross compiler toolchain.
And Rust does this amazingly using
rustup. Uh you just add uh a different
target. This specifically for this case
it's uh it's an ARM target called a
thumb V6, I think.
Um
or V7. Uh the point is that the it's a
lot simpler than what you usually need
[22:22]
to do in C to implement a cross
compilation.
Uh we need to provide a runtime,
um which uh
uh if you didn't know, when you for
example define a variable in C or in
Rust,
uh which has some initial value, let's
say seven,
some code uh has to run before your main
code to actually prepare that variable
to actually be the value you're
expecting to be.
That code is called the runtime.
And
the Rust the Rust embedded group have
also provided uh something some form of
a minimal runtime that you need for the
microcontroller to ensure that
everything around your code that's
running is prepared properly.
You also need a file called memory.x,
which is Rust's way of creating a linker
script. Using that file, you essentially
define
the address spaces where
your flash and RAM live. You can also
use that, which I used
[23:23]
to define where you want to do heap
allocations.
Uh the next thing you need is a file
called build.rs,
which lets us force the Rust compiler to
And finally, after all that, we have our
main.rs,
which contains which should contain at
least four things. The first one is
obviously our function main, which would
be our entry point to the code.
We would want to create or uh
or import uh a panic handler.
So, once any part of the code calls
panic, it will jump to that specific
piece of code.
We also want to define a global
allocator. So, anytime you want to use
something that uses the heap, for
example, uh creating vecs, using
uh most of the news that we want to use,
uh we will need to provide a global
allocator,
um which will allocate uh memory in the
heap of a certain location that we
define.
And the final thing we need to define is
something called a hardware exception
[24:26]
handlers. So, when um an interrupt
occurs in the chip, for example, if you
divide by zero,
um you need to to tell the
microcontroller
uh a form of an emergency jump it needs
to do uh to specific uh location of code
that you want to handle that situation.
So, you need to also provide those.
And
after we provided all that, we can start
working on our on our project.
So, what about debugging?
So, debugging is super easy uh if you
have the right tools. Uh Rust, luckily,
supports GDB out of the box, uh which
means we can use, for example, something
called OpenOCD, which is a a soft a
piece of software that lets us take any
type of debugger,
uh
and use it to expose a GDB server that
we can connect to, for example, using uh
VS Code.
Um
that allows us to do step-by-step
debugging on the microcontroller while
running Rust.
And
[25:28]
on top of that, in this specific case,
because the microcontroller is a modern
ARM chip, it also has something called
RTT, which lets us, through the JTAG
port, essentially send any arbitrary
data that we want.
Uh and a company called Ferrous Systems
uh created a crate called Defmt, which
lets you send out logs and panics and
all this information throughout uh
through the JTAG port,
uh without requiring any extra space.
And
so in this case, uh because the I was
essentially enumerating USB a lot,
connecting the microcontroller to my
Windows PC would make it crash quite
quickly. So I set aside a Raspberry Pi,
uh which has the microcontroller, which
you can see down here, uh connected to
it, and uh JTAG debugger um by ST
connected to its uh debug pins.
And all this uh remote because this is
GDB, GDB exposes uh a remote connection
server, which means
[26:30]
the the Raspberry Pi can be located um
somewhere further, and I can just easily
uh by clicking debug actually debug
remotely on the Raspberry Pi the the
microcontroller code.
And on top of that, we also have the
Defmt, which lets me just see um
structured messages, including their
location in code, where they're printed
from.
Um okay, so what about safety?
Um
so we started with talking about global
variables.
Um global variables are coming as
standard in embedded projects. They're
literally one of the most common thing
you will see in almost every embedded
project. And because we're using Rust
and we want to change or read these
variables across other pieces of our
code,
we're forced to use a mutex. We can't do
it otherwise. The Rust compiler will
stop you.
The second thing is concurrency. So in
the same aspect, if you want to transfer
[27:31]
data between pieces of code, uh we will
have to make sure that um
that all these the shared data cannot be
um
cannot be uh
uh written
uh overwritten while we're working on
it. So the only way to actually
implement it is by using some form of a
concurrency tool, which for example
could have been a mutex, but in this
case uh using the concurrent queue uh
helped also alleviate the fact that like
the the data rate between
certain pieces of the code is not equal.
And the nice thing about it is because
the concurrency is forced on you, even
if you use an interrupt driven system,
which you can think about as multiple
threads that are uh unscheduled,
you can still use the same concurrent
ideas and it will still be safe.
Uh the first thing is obviously
compilation and panic gotchas. So
obviously when you write a parser to an
API, you won't necessarily get it right
the first time, especially when it comes
to uh uh
[28:32]
uh packed data.
So the Rust compiler caught me in a lot
of times where I would either um
miscalculate things and cause an
overflow or underflow for a certain uh
that uh
uh field, or I would miscalculate the
the API sizes, which also uh caused um
uh panics or compilation errors.
Okay.
I think I uh I dig enough. Let's Let's
So, um I'm going to
switch my OBS
to
this. Uh everybody can see see me and
the uh
and the little uh Chrome tab that's
running.
Gabo?
Yeah, I can Well, yeah, sorry.
Um
you can switch to speaker view. Everyone
can switch to
um in the view section of
Okay, I'll hit I like this. Spotlight
for everyone. Now, can everyone see me?
Yeah. Now, it's better. I think yeah,
[29:32]
that's what I should should have done.
Yeah.
Okay, perfect. So, um
what are we looking at right now? So, on
on our little Chrome tab, uh we can see
uh the website that was served by the
microcontroller.
Um it's right right here on the bottom.
You can see it uh right here.
Uh
the microcontroller served the website,
and of course it Oh, there we go. It's
still alive. Thank god.
Um
and it it served the website.
And
uh in the website, there's also
JavaScript code that constantly pulls
the microcontroller with get requests.
Using that, it pulls out um the amount
of loops per second the main
while loop has done.
And also the ADC is running
and presenting us the current
temperature of the microcontroller. So,
if I
if I touch and apply pressure on the
chip a bit, it should let the
[30:32]
temperature rise up slightly.
And we can also do it the other way
using post requests. So, for example,
there's a little uh screen here, which
I'm realizing you're not seeing, but I'm
now picking a different color, and
hopefully
we can see on the screen. Of course, it
doesn't work. The I didn't uh
I didn't face the demo gods. So, we're
And
well, the demo gods do not like me
today.
Well, I
Yeah, so essentially this uh section of
the uh
of the RGB should have controlled the
RGB LED on the board. I'm guessing it
might be because of Chrome not liking me
today.
Um
[31:49]
Okay. Um
one important note I wanted to say uh
about the um this this project.
This ended up being um
93K of flash used to make this project,
where 6 KB was the actual website.
Uh one nice trick that I did was
uh by um
by um minifying and then gzipping the uh
the website. Uh I don't know if you
know, but you can you can send on the
wire a gzipped uh website, like an HTML
file,
and the browser itself will unzip it and
then uh display it for the client.
Which means you can really make a
really, really small website uh quite
compact,
and uh still provide it.
And I ended up using uh 16 KB of RAM uh
for the heap to do all the message
parsing and uh creating the HTML text
[32:50]
that you need to serve um well, the the
get and post requests, mostly handling
them.
Um
obviously, um having uh a project that
is pure uh Rust um
is great and all uh when you make a
little hobbyist project or you're trying
to make a
um something from scratch, but uh life
tends to be a bit more complicated than
that, and a lot of times we would uh
like to add just a little bit of Rust to
our C code. Um
but luckily, Rust uh s- uh has supported
that from day one. That was one of the
original things they they did when they
created the language. So, Rust
inherently supports using a foreign
function interface
uh to essentially call or be called by
uh
C code, for example.
Um so, that means that we can use our
code to call uh
uh other code that was written in C,
[33:53]
or um we can have some C base and have
only the safe and optimized part or the
newer parts of our code that we want to
use in this big project written in Rust.
One perfect example for that is uh
on the ESP32, uh we have a crate called
So, ESP provides something they call
their IDF,
which is a cr- um which is a a framework
which contains um
which contains
uh
uh uh FreeRTOS running with multiple
drivers to control
um many of the actual like parts of the
chip. For example, controlling the
Wi-Fi, controlling the Bluetooth,
controlling all the peripherals,
handling networking, and encryption,
file operations.
And
you write your code above it as one of
the threads of the free RTOS.
[34:55]
So, what the people that wrote the
ESP-IDF crate ESP-IDF-SVC crate did was
essentially treat your Rust code as one
of those threads.
Which means you can treat you can just
write standard Rust.
And even async Rust if you want.
And it will be embedded into this
project. And you have just created a
safe part of the code uh running inside
this massive framework that's already
been written.
So, this framework obviously contains
all the how drivers
uh that we talked about. It also
contains higher-level setup functions.
So, um for example, you can ask the
Wi-Fi to uh scan.
Which would require quite a lot of code
to write, but for you it's just one
function you call in Rust.
And
to actually show that, I created another
demo uh which I call the ClickUp task
e-paper display.
Uh I like to use ClickUp, which is like
[35:56]
Monday and all these other to-do to-do
apps
um to manage all my uh the personal
tasks I need to do.
And
what I what I wanted to do was have a
little e-paper screen next to my desk,
which shows me my current tasks.
So, the flow of the project is that the
microcontroller connects to my home
Wi-Fi.
Uses HTTPS to uh perform a get request
on the ClickUp API and get all my tasks.
It then parses that information uses
serde_json.
Uh cuz this is what comes back is JSON.
Uh it validates uh which of the tasks
are late, and it adds a small indicator
about it.
Uh we then use a hashing function to
check if any of the data uh changed from
the last time we checked it.
And if it did, we create a new display
layout on the e-paper display, and we
send that that frame buffer to the
e-paper display.
This project is again, it's only maybe
[36:58]
six or seven uh um tasks that we need to
do, but in that we relied on so much
code from the ESP-IDF crates, and from
the Rust side as well. Uh
in For example, we had to uh use the
Wi-Fi driver. We had to uh
have the ESP-IDF provide certificates so
we can do HTTPS properly. We had to use
networking to do all the protocols. We
had to use HTTP. We had to use SMTP to
get the actual real-time right now. Uh a
DC TCP client to actually provide an IP
address for the ESP32.
SPI to um
to control the screen, and to hold the
previous hash, we also needed to use the
non-volatile storage.
And on the Rust side, obviously there's
more crates as well. So, we had to use
uh vecs, which are part of the standard
Rust.
Uh
and we also use serde.
And we used uh some tools to create the
graphics, which is embedded-graphics,
and uh a driver which controls the the
[38:01]
And I can even
if I'll give a quick one of these,
and I'll do a spotlight.
So, we can see uh
all we needed is one microcontroller,
which is one here, and obviously the um
the display adapter board, and it just
works.
Okay.
Um
we had fun. Let's talk about
conclusions. So,
great. We have made projects which are
safe. They fit in microcontrollers.
They're as fast as we want. Uh really
just uh zero cost abstractions.
Everything is great. But, the question
we wanted to ask was are we embedded?
So,
we need to talk about the small issues
that we currently have in the industry,
especially when it comes to embedded
[39:02]
projects. So, the first one is that
embedded engineers are really tough nut.
Um usually they have so much experience
and insanity writing really archaic C
code or even like just like hand making
assembly uh to handle all these extreme
cases in their microcontrollers that
they really really
rarely will even think about trying
trying to use a different language than
C
or C++ if they use embedded Linux.
We also have
that walls us to the second problem,
which is the customer vendor problem.
Um as long as the customers don't ask I
want to do this project on your
microcontroller in Rust,
all the supporting tool chain will stay
in the open source side. And I've been
constantly checking a lot of vendors,
for example, ST which we used here, NXP,
Renesas, Microchip, which all these
companies are some of the biggest
companies in the world when it comes to
um microcontrollers that we can find
[40:03]
everywhere. None of them support Rust.
Um they
and some of them even tell you, "Why do
you do this? You don't want to do this."
So, there is a quite a lot of pushback.
The only company right now that's uh
supporting the community when it comes
uh Rust on embedded project is
expressive with the ESP32, which
provides examples and support for the
actual Rust code.
The third thing is that Rust did not
invent the word safe code.
The idea of having safe code has been
around for quite couple decades and has
been standardized in multiple
technical standards for the automotive,
medical, industrial, aerospace, military
world. Each one of them has their own
standard.
I am happy to say that Ferrous Systems,
the company that we talked about
earlier, have created their own version
of the Rust compiler called Ferrocene
and this compiler can actually comply
[41:05]
with with the standards. So, if you
write your Rust code and use that
specific compiler, you can get approval
for
advanced
um
safety standards that are provided in
other industries. The two things that
are currently unsupported by this
compiler are the aerospace industry, so
you can't send yet a missile written in
Rust, but maybe hopefully soon.
And
and military applications.
And the final thing is the RTOS thing.
So, I I vaguely mentioned RTOS in the
start and when we were talking about
ESP, but RTOS's are quite common in the
embedded world and they're so common
that they have a lot of agent them. So,
for example, Free RTOS, which is quite
used a lot, is 21 years old.
ThreadX, which has been used quite a lot
and it's been bought by Microsoft and
now called Azure RTOS, it's been around
for 27 years.
And we also have something called
[42:07]
MicroC/OS, which has been used to land
rockets on the moon
and it's also been around for 33 years.
But on on the RTOS on the right side, we
do have few projects which I know of at
least that are pretty big and like
pretty have a good amount of of code
base and followers. The first one is
called Embassy.
Which tries to implement async rust in
microcontrollers with a single again
with a single single core essentially.
Um it works pretty well
and it has all the supports. Um but
obviously it and the next one has the
same issue. It's they're still very very
young. So it's kind of hard for
people to trust that these um
RTOSes are stable enough uh for actual
hard applications. For example, we can
take an extreme case and say a
pacemaker.
Uh which you have to make sure that
everything works
[43:07]
to the point.
Uh we also have Arctic which is an a
real example where they use interrupts
as threads.
Um
and it is another concept of an RTOS.
Uh but at the end of the day till we
won't have enough years and experience
of of using these
uh RTOSes, it will still be a challenge
to treat them as good as the C
equivalents.
That's it. Uh thank you so much and if
you have any questions, you're more than
First of all, thank you.
Uh let me just check
So
the spotlight, how did you turn on the
spotlight?
Ah.
Right here.
And you right click your
I believe you right click your face and
[44:08]
Um
okay.
Okay, I can't find it now, but okay,
I'll I'll find it. Okay, anyway,
thank you very much for for this talk.
If anyone has any questions or would
like to ask now,
please go ahead now in the still still
in the chat. Otherwise, we are going to
finish the the video and then you can
stay around and have a chat without
without needing to type, but it seems
that people
had enough questions already and they're
saying thank you. So, thank you, too.
So,
Mao, thank you very much for this
presentation. Hopefully, the
Thank you for having me.
Hopefully, the video will be I I it's a
pleasure, really.
We already had a couple of these these
presentations and others.
I'm really I like it and I hope that
you'll give us more more presentations
like this and even more detailed ones
and then anyone actually
watching or listening, you would be
[45:09]
welcome to offer your presentation. Talk
to me. And those who watching the video,
thank you and please like the video and
follow the channel. And see you
see you next time. Bye-bye.

=== ROW 75 | f012476 | https://youtube.com/watch?v=qqF_zFWqFYk | 2025-04-30T00:00:00 | twir-links ===
[00:02]
Hey uh today uh we'll be talking about
Slate DB. Slate DB is a embedded
database built on object store. Let me
start with my introduction. I am pretty
new to Rust. I started only couple of
months back. I don't use it at my uh day
job. I now do uh data infrastructure at
Door Dash. Before this I was at
Microsoft in Azure stream processing.
Uh, Slate DB is an open source project
that I contribute to for fun. It's a
passion project. Uh, so I'm not a REST
expert. I'm very very new. So that's
that's uh that's a little bit about me.
Now with that uh let's see what the plan
for today is. We'll start with the
motivation and share why SLB was
started. I'll share what it is and then
we will get into the internals of uh uh
how it is built.
Let's uh let's start with the uh
[01:02]
introduction. Object store is uh rising.
Uh things like Azure blob storage, S3
and GCP, they offer very attractive
properties. You can batch and then uh
increase the latency and at a very
attractive cost profile offer a lot of
uh good performance for customers. We
see this in a lot of uh uh products. You
see something like warpstream which is a
Kafka compatible streaming
platform. It offers Kafka protocol and
it stores all the data on S3. The
compute is
stateless. All the state is in S3. You
see similar uh thing in table formats
like
iceberg, Apache um hoodie and delta.
They offer uh table storage over uh
object
storage.
[02:02]
Now this was the motivation and Slate DB
is a project that offers key value
interface over these object stores. When
you look at this, there are three common
techniques that are used across all of
these uh all of these designs. One of
them is immutable
files. Files once written are never
changed and new
data creates new files. The second is
batched rights. I talked about this for
a little bit. Put API calls are some of
the API calls that are uh most
expensive. you can increase the batching
and then with that uh you have uh you
reduce the cost. The third is
conditional rights. This was not
available in S3 until August last year
or so. It is available now in S3. With
that it is available in all the major
cloud providers. The conditional write
which is write a file if it doesn't
exist along with uh the technique of use
predictable file names such as one file
[03:04]
number one file number two and so on u
that is used to cause conflicts and uh
so that two different clients don't o uh
overwrite each other's data. So these
three common techniques are used in a
lot of uh products. Um that's what is
used in slate DB as well.
With that, let's get to what is Llay DB.
It's a Rust library. It's an embedded
key value store. Uh if you use Rox DB,
it offers a very similar interface. Um
there is get and put and it has range
reads. It's implemented as a log
structure merge
tree. It is useful for cases where a
little bit of latency like 50 mconds to
100 milliseconds is reasonable.
Some uh practical use cases are stream
processing state store uh durable
execution durable caches and so
on. There are uh two companies that are
using it in production today. One is
[04:06]
responsive. Responsive is uh uh hosted
Kafka streams. They use Slate DB for a
custom uh state store and uh Tensor Lake
is an AI company. They ingest uh
documents and create uh context for
LLMs. They use it for uh they use it for
storing uh data as
well. Now with that uh I'm not sure how
much you can see on the screen. Uh this
is uh this is an example of how you can
use it. Um there is not a lot going on
here. It uses the object store crate. uh
you create the object store create and
then you pass in couple of properties uh
with that you have a
database you you see two sections here
the first section is doing a put and
it's doing a wait what that will do is
it will exit only after the data is
durably returned to S3 u or any other
object
[05:06]
storage in the second loop it's writing
thousand keys but you see await durable
false. What that will do is the uh await
will exit even before the data is
written to uh object store and the flush
call that is happening at the end that's
what will make it uh durable and uh this
crate. So with that I'm going to go into
the internals of what happens when you
do a a put. There are uh couple of
terminologies. Um as I shared earlier,
this is built as a log structure merge
tree. Uh and the first is the SSD file.
It's a it is a binary file. It has key
value pairs and a little bit of
metadata. Uh two important metadata that
is there in the SSD files are uh bloom
filter and what is the first key. There
are there is a little bit more uh than
[06:07]
that. And then there is a terminology
called as write ahead log that's used.
It uses the same format as SST. Uh I'll
share more in the upcoming
slides. After that there is the sorted
run. It is a set of SSD files and each
of the SSD file have non-over
overlapping
keys. Manifest file shares the state of
the database at any point in time. So
the state of the database is the set of
SSD files that are part of the
database with those terminologies. Let
me get to the rights. Um in the next
slide I have a sequence of what happens.
But let's start with this picture
first. There are two sections that you
see here. One is the memory section. The
second is the object store section.
when you do a put all the data is in the
[07:07]
inmemory structure called as u uh wall
in this picture and at some frequency uh
that's defined by the user that's
returned to object store uh in the
folder called uh w uh here we see 73.
SST that's the first right that happens
to um that happens to object storage
and there is another property called as
L0 SST size bytes when that limit is hit
it also creates a file in the compacted
folder rightes are durable the moment
the data is written to uh wall and uh
these files are numbered so two
different clients will not uh overwrite
data. This one shows what happens in
each of the step. Uh in the first step,
what we see here is it's doing a wait
[08:08]
and when it does that in the object
store, it would create uh it would
create it would create the 001.
SST. In the second statement, it is not
waiting. In that case, nothing changes
in the object
store. And when you uh flush, you see
that there is another SST that's uh
getting
created. Finally, in the fourth step,
let's assume that uh lot of keys were
written and we hit the L0 SST size
bytes. Uh there there is the XYZ SSD
that's created and there is a new
manifest. In the manifest you see that
L0 has the file XYZ. SSD. Uh there are
there is one more property here that is
interesting. Uh that's the last
compacted there you see the number two.
[09:10]
What that means is uh write ahead log 0
0 1
002 they are uh no longer part of the
database they are um they are they are
in the xyz. SSD file so that that's what
happens in uh
right as I'm describing this I'm
skipping over some of the details uh to
fit it into the 30 minute or so of talk.
uh it also creates empty uh wall on
initialization and few other aspects
that I'm skipping uh
today. The next thing that uh is
interesting here is compaction.
Compaction is taking a set of files
creating another set of files that is
more optimized. Uh I'm not getting into
the details. U if if uh someone is
interested I can get back to this uh
later.
Now let's assume that a couple of writes
[10:10]
have happened and a couple of
compactions have also happened. This is
an example of how the state would be uh
in object store. What we see here is um
there is the there is there are multiple
write ahead log SSTs. There is one
called like 73. SSD and you see
compacted has additional folder files
and there are a lot of
immutable. Okay. Now let's look at the
manifest
and okay let's look at the manifest and
uh look at some of the properties. The
first one is straightforward. It is a
manifest ID.
Every manifest uh has an ID and it
increases from 1 2 3 and so on. Writer
epoch is the epoch of the writer um that
[11:10]
created this manifest. It's also
incremented every time a new writer is
created. There are few other properties.
Um here I'm showing a simplified
manifest. I talked about the wall ID
last compacted before.
compacted every time compaction runs
that particular property is updated.
two other properties L0 that is the set
of SSD files that's waiting to be
compacted and compacted is a sequence of
sorted runs and each sorted run is a
sequence of SSD
files that is what is there in the
manifest every time an update to the
database happens a new manifest is
created there are couple of different
kinds of updates that happens when a new
[12:10]
writer is created ated the epoch will be
incremented and a new manifest will be
written. When an L0 file is
added then the u the array that you see
here that talks about a list of L0 SSTs
that particular array will be updated
and a new uh manifest will be
written. compaction when it creates a
new sortter run that would also update
the manifest and writer
initialization will um create the
manifest as well uh with a incremented
writer. Uh so
essentially every time a change to the
database happens a new manifest is
created.
reads reads are uh reads are very
similar to the writes. It starts with
the mem table and goes down the stack in
the in the sorted
[13:13]
runs. And again L0 has overlapping keys
and uh the sorted runs have non-over
overlapping
keys. Okay. So I talked about uh L0
creating an SSD file and then updating a
manifest and I also talked about uh
write ahead locks that are no longer
part of the database but are there in
S3. So these operations create um files
that are not referenced by anything
anymore. Uh also every update creates a
new manifest. So there are a lot of
these files lying around. garbage
collection process kicks in at uh some
files. Compaction is another kind of a
maintenance operation. Compaction it's
like it is a regular LSM compaction. And
the interesting thing about u the design
of not having any state and keeping all
[14:13]
the state in S3 is that this maintenance
operation can now run in a different
process in a different machine.
And this is how one of the uh users or
responsive I think they do run it in a
separate
process. Uh now let's talk about uh
checkpoints and snapshot reads or time
travel reads because every change
creates a separate
manifest. You can use an old manifest
and open a readonly database that will
give you the state of the database as of
some time back. That property is very
interesting for uh something like a
state store where you could have two
different consumers and each consumer is
looking at the database at a different
point in
time and in in delta this is uh kind of
marketed as time travel reads that that
comes for free with this kind of a uh
design. Now I talked about garbage
[15:14]
collection and I also talked about
reading from an old
state. So garbage collection can delete
the files that are uh not referenced by
the current
manifest. So to avoid that from
happening you can checkpoint. All that
is going to do is there is a checkpoints
array and that will be updated with uh
the ID of the manifest that you want to
be
checkpointed. The other interesting
thing is the writable
clone because all of these files are on
S3. It's very very easy to create and
very cheap to create a writable clone.
uh the only thing that change that had
to change in the manifest is a reference
to a parent database.
So the metadata is copied over but the
uh actual SSD files uh are still
[16:14]
referenced with that you can easily
create a uh writable clone and uh
continue and these uh these two
databases can um continue to exist
independently.
So with all of that here are the
features. Zero disk, a single writer,
you can have multiple
readers, there is caching implemented as
well. Uh things like manifest files, the
metadata, bloom filters, even the SSD
files, all of that can be cached locally
improving the read performance. There is
uh snapshot isolation and compaction
that can run
independently. There is checkpoint and
writable
clones. And here are three things that
are coming up in the future. One is
language bindings for uh other languages
[17:14]
like Java. Uh transactions the RFC is uh
still uh being discussed. Uh that will
be coming up soon. uh change data
capture uh is coming up soon as well. Uh
that will let you continuously stream
the ch uh state of the database to
another
system and that's what I had. So this is
the grade and there are couple of good
uh first issues uh including
documentation updates and few lowh
hanging fruits if you're interested.
Mic check.
[18:15]
Hello. Uh so uh question you mentioned
garbage collection and sorting. So
uh is it some separate process that
running or it's writer how it's
happening like it's library right so for
garbage collection you need somehow
invoke this garbage collection you need
somehow invoke this compaction so how
it's happening yeah there are uh two
ways in which it can happen there is a
admin utility you can run that admin
utility and then it can do a one-time
compaction or uh the process that is the
writer can act as the garbage collection
as well. It will it has a it has a
thread that wakes up at uh some point in
time and does it or you can have a
separate garbage collection that will
continues to run and again only kick off
garbage collection at some point. So you
need something that's longunning.
Okay. Uh second question is about uh
[19:17]
single writer. So what exactly it mean
practically? It's like only one thread
can write.
Yeah. What it means is you can have
multiple threads that can write but
there is only a single process. At the
initialization what happens is a new uh
manifest gets created and a and an empty
write ahead log is uh created. So let's
say you had a second writer that will
attempt to write a write ahead log and
it will hit a conflict and it will
exit. The the principle that we want to
keep is that there is only one writer
that is active.
Hi. So, um I've only used S3 a little
little bit. Uh but my understanding, and
correct me if I'm wrong, is that in
theory I could take my little keys and
[20:18]
values and just throw them directly in
S3 and treat it as a key value store. Y
I assume that would be really slow and
expensive or both and other problems.
Um, so is that because S3 should be
doing a lot of this stuff and they just
haven't done it yet or how do I
understand like why
S3 isn't good at doing this kind of
thing? U, so S3 is designed as an object
store for storing a little bit uh larger
files. Uh, it is not even intending to
do something like a key value store.
There are other services in AWS that
does it. U and yes you are right if we
could just keep it um in S3 but then
that will be expensive you need to do
some kind of a batching and then you
need a way to organize these files and
[21:23]
I'm very inexperienced with any any of
this like cloud infrastructure stuff.
So, this is probably a super basic
question. How do you think about like
the natural limits of this approach?
Like what what does this where does this
hit the wall? Where where does this stop
performing? Where where like what what
would limit this from being used on on
any kind of of like key value problem?
Yeah. Uh there is a benchmark um that is
on the on GitHub. this thing that runs
every day. Uh you can look at the
numbers. There will be two kinds of
limits. One is S3 will have limits on uh
throughput and the number of operations
that it supports on a particular bucket.
So that's the first kind of limit and
the machine that it runs on
uh that will have some kind of a limit
in terms of um amount of uh operations
per second that it can do. So that will
be the second kind of uh limit. there
would also be a back pressure. Uh I was
[22:24]
talking about these L0 files and all of
these compactions that are happening at
it is possible that the rights are
happening so fast that the compactions
are not uh happening and with that the
read performance will be very bad. So
there are some
uh defaults that are set in terms of if
it is falling behind a certain number of
uh uh compactions then stall the rights
right so those three kinds of uh limits
would be hit uh on specific numbers I
don't have it right now but the num it
is available through the performance
runs
Sorry I have low voice today. Um so just
before asking my question I want to
understand you said that you will batch
rights right to optimize performance. So
[23:24]
what happen if um while you're writing
on the wall um things are botched the
process die? Do you have data loss? How
do you do have some sort of journaling?
How do you figure out if things as you
were writing were botched? What went
through? What didn't go through? And uh
if you can recover the data you were
writing.
Yep. Uh that's a great question. Yes,
there will be a data loss. Uh and I
shared couple of use cases where this is
applicable. Uh it is durable only after
you call
flesh. Right? Sometimes when you call
flush there is nothing to write u the
flush milliseconds frequency uh kicked
in and then it wrote the data to be sure
it's always uh important to call flush
but the use cases that I was talking
about let's say stage um store for
stream processing your data is already
in something like Kafka and you are
reading that and then doing some
[24:25]
transformation and uh as you do that you
persist in the state store and then you
send it to your output right
now. You can control a lot of uh uh this
in a process like Kafka streams. Uh
there it's it's okay for you to not
right. You have a way to know what was
in the queue to be fleshed. Let's assume
you have a Kafka stream. How do I know
what
um what items in the stream went through
the pipe? Do you have some sort of
journaling in process or is there any
plan to have some sort of jour
journaling? Uh that journaling will be
in the user application. So yeah in the
case of Kafka streams that the the Kafka
[25:25]
streams program will have that kind of
journaling.
Thank you.

=== ROW 76 | f012563 | https://blog.rust-lang.org/inside-rust/2025/06/21/announcing-the-clippy-feature-freeze | 2025-06-25T00:00:00 | twir-links ===
Announcing the Clippy feature freeze | Inside Rust Blog
Inside Rust Blog
Rust
Install
Learn
Tools
Governance
Community
🖌
Light
Dark
System
Announcing the Clippy feature freeze
June 21, 2025 · blyxyas
on behalf of the Clippy team
The Clippy project will be on feature-freeze for 12 weeks, starting from Rust
1.89.0 beta (June 26th 2025) to September 18th 2025 (Rust 1.89.0 stable
release). During this time no new features will be accepted, only bug fixes.
This feature freeze comes from a lack of the necessary capacity needed
to maintain all the current lints (over 750 of them 😱) and still add new ones.
We need to care for the Clippy project the same way that Clippy cares about our
code, and note that every single one of them needs maintaining and accounting
for current and future changes in the compiler as a whole.
As a team we’ll focus on making contributing the best it can be, and mark the
issues that could be great as a starting point to get familiar with the project.
What can I expect as a user?
As a user you can expect to have more accurate lints, with less false positives
and more edge cases covered. A bump into Clippy’s toolchain would not involve
the same risk for false positives as it has been until now. We hope that by
upping the standard for lints all around the project we can allow users to
expect even more from the already great linter.
If you have a lint which you want to be implemented, you can still open an
issue for it, but PRs adding new lints won't be reviewed during the feature
freeze. Instead, they will be put into a queue and reviewed (and merged) after
the feature freeze is over.
Open pull requests that add new lints and are in a very advanced state
might still get reviewed and/or merged during the feature freeze.
Can I help?
As always, any help on the project is very appreciated. Apart from opening bug
reports, you can follow our contributing guidelines and check our suggested
good first issues for opening pull requests. Everything from fixing diagnostic
issues and improving documentation, to fixing application-wide crashes
really helps Clippy get into the excellent state that our users deserve.
If you need direct help when fixing a bug, don't hesitate to open a thread on
Zulip and/or open a draft PR with the questions you have in order to start
the feedback stream.
Conclusion
Thanks a lot for all these years of supporting Clippy, we hope that via this
little feature hiatus we can achieve the excellence that the Rust user base
deserves.
Get help!
Documentation
Contact the Rust Team
Terms and policies
Code of Conduct
Licenses
Logo Policy and Media Guide
Security Disclosures
All Policies
Social
RSS
Main Blog
"Inside Rust" Blog
Maintained by the Rust Team. See a typo?
Send a fix here!

=== ROW 77 | f012601 | https://blog.rust-lang.org/inside-rust/2025/07/21/sunsetting-the-rustwasm-github-org | 2025-07-23T00:00:00 | twir-links ===
Sunsetting the rustwasm GitHub org | Inside Rust Blog
Inside Rust Blog
Rust
Install
Learn
Tools
Governance
Community
🖌
Light
Dark
System
Sunsetting the rustwasm GitHub org
July 21, 2025 · Alex Crichton
In 2024 the Rust and WebAssembly Working Group was officially
archived in the Rust project after ~5 years of inactivity with an
intent to shut down the rustwasm GitHub Organization soon after. Although a
bit later than intended the purpose of this post is to give a concrete timeline
for this process in which the rustwasm GitHub Organization will become fully
archived.
The wasm-bindgen repository is going to be transferred to a new
wasm-bindgen organization with new additional maintainers. All
other repositories in the rustwasm organization are going to be archived in
place or transferred to their existing maintainers if they elect to do so.
Transferring wasm-bindgen will occur in the weeks following this post and
archiving the organization is going to happen September 2025.
The rustwasm organization has historically been under the purview of the Rust
and WebAssembly Working Group, and given the historical prominence of some
projects it contained, this post is serving as an announcement of upcoming plans
for repositories in the organization.
History of the Rust and WebAssembly Working Group
The Rust and WebAssembly Working Group was created in 2018 as part of
the initiative for the 2018 edition at the time. Through 2019 the
working group was quite active and helped Rust's support for WebAssembly
flourish. Tools such as wasm-bindgen and wasm-pack were created as part
of this effort and continue to be used to this day. After 2019 though the
organization saw a drastic reduction in activity and most projects have been in
maintenance mode for nearly 5 years at this point.
While the working group has been officially archived for over a year now the
repositories in the rustwasm organization continued on and continued to see
some use and minor maintenance. This has perpetuated a confusing situation for
users and maintainers alike where it's not clear what the maintenance story for
many of these repositories are and how to move forward with the repositories
that are actively in use.
Sunsetting the rustwasm Organization
In September of 2025 the rustwasm GitHub organization will be archived to
cease all activity within the organization. This will help clarify that
rustwasm is no longer a central hub for all things Rust-and-WebAssembly but
instead is a historical archive of efforts.
The rustwasm organization has a number of repositories within it, most of
which haven't seen any activity in quite some time. The current plan at this
time is to arrange for wasm-bindgen to be transferred to a new
project-specific organization and additionally add new fresh
maintainers to assist with project direction going forward. All other
repositories in the rustwasm organization will be archived or transferred to
their existing maintainers if needed.
Transferring wasm-bindgen
The wasm-bindgen project is relied on in a number of contexts today and
existing users have expressed interest in both maintaining and growing the
repository over time. The rustwasm organization is no longer a great home for
this work so the plan is to transfer it out to a new home in a neutral location
not owned by any one person or company. This transfer will be coupled with
inviting new maintainers to the repository for improved project maintenance in
addition to evolving the project.
While a critical mass of new maintainers has already been reached, if you are
interested in helping out with maintenance an issue has been
created to coordinate efforts around maintenance with
wasm-bindgen. Feel free to leave a comment there to help out with this
transition.
Archiving other repositories
The current plan at this time is to archive all other repositories in the
rustwasm organization. This includes repositories such as:
https://github.com/rustwasm/wasm-pack
https://github.com/rustwasm/gloo
https://github.com/rustwasm/twiggy
https://github.com/rustwasm/walrus
https://github.com/rustwasm/weedle
(see https://github.com/orgs/rustwasm/repositories for the full list)
Note: wasm-bindgen depends on crates such as walrus and weedle at this
time and won't depend on archived repositories. Depending on how maintainers
would like to organize it these dependencies may be inlined into the
wasm-bindgen repository for wasm-bindgen's needs or they may be transferred to
the new wasm-bindgen organization. Regardless wasm-bindgen will not be using
unmaintained dependencies.
If you are an preexisting maintainer of one of these repositories please reach
out to have the repository transferred to you. Otherwise it's not clear at this
time whether these repositories are still actively in use or how much they're
relied on. The historically trusted nature of the rustwasm organization means
it's not quite as simple as transferring these repositories to the first
volunteer. Instead transferring repositories will require vetting new
maintainers for trustworthiness and reliability and unfortunately the current
admin of the rustwasm organization is not prepared to do this.
If your use case critically relies on these repositories it is
recommended to fork the repository. Where required it's possible to leave a
message in the old README pointing to the fork. If a fork is not viable then
understanding is appreciated in that the rustwasm organization has been
inactive for over 5 years now and there are no known active maintainers to
reach out to. Charting a path for each repository requires a significant amount
of effort to understand current users and plan for future users and no one is
available to perform this work. The goal of this effort is to do the best with
maintainers/admins that still remain and while not a perfect answer it's
predicted the best answer in many cases here is archiving the repository.
As an absolute last resort you can reach out to @alexcrichton on Zulip to
discuss alternatives.
Timeline for transfers/archives
The wasm-bindgen repository will be transferred to a new wasm-bindgen
organization in the weeks after this post. Some minor details still
need to be sorted out maintainer-wise and that's all that's left to do.
Afterwards a final grace period will be allowed until September at which point
the rustwasm organization will become fully archived. Issues will be filed in
various repositories giving a heads up to any interested folks indicating as
such.
Get help!
Documentation
Contact the Rust Team
Terms and policies
Code of Conduct
Licenses
Logo Policy and Media Guide
Security Disclosures
All Policies
Social
RSS
Main Blog
"Inside Rust" Blog
Maintained by the Rust Team. See a typo?
Send a fix here!

=== ROW 78 | f012698 | https://youtube.com/watch?v=ec-ucXJ4x-0 | 2025-10-01T00:00:00 | twir-links ===
[00:06]
Hello. Um, today we're going to talk
about something a little different.
Everybody else talks about how to
optimize your Rust program to make it
faster. Um, we're going to talk about
how to make it slower. Uh, at the very
end, we'll do a little bit of discussing
about how to make it run uh, faster.
Again,
uh, a little bit about me. I'm an
open-source um maintainer. My most
important package is fast limb, which is
a genomics package that uses uh Rust and
Python for genomewide association
studies. Previously to that, I was a
research programmer uh for Microsoft
research, but I also sometimes go off on
tangents. And in this case, it's a
tangent that got me interested in uh
learning about uh touring machines and
some new results related to touring
machines. Um we're also going to learn
something about large numbers and uh at
[01:07]
the end we'll learn how to um not just
make programs run slow, but some ideas
Uh for all of this, the challenge is
going to be set up about how to make
short rust programs with very long
running times. And in each case, we'll
define what we mean by uh a short
program and what we mean by a long
running time. And we'll do that via a
series of what we'll call rule sets.
So um let's move on to the very first
rule set. In this rule set, anything
goes. So, if I asked you how to make a
Rust program
that's short and runs for a long time,
uh what would your idea be? And you
might uh think that what you'd want to
do is an infinite loop. And indeed,
that's an excellent way to do uh to meet
the criteria. And in Rust, uh this is
[02:09]
what an infinite loop uh looks like.
So, that does what I said. It's what I
asked for. It's very short. Uh it's nice
that it takes negligible memory,
but the one problem with it maybe is
that it uh doesn't halt. So we might
want to change our criteria so that we
also require that our programs stop. And
let's uh add that and call that rule set
two. So in rule set two, our programs
have to halt. Um but we still have this
uh requirement that the amount of memory
we use is uh is bounded.
And a nice way to approach this is to
have um is to use nested fixed range
loops. And in Rust that looks something
like this. We'll uh have a program here
with four nested loops with four uh loop
variables. And each loop variable will
[03:10]
go from zero to the maximum unsigned 128
int.
And just for fun on the inner loop,
every 1 billion uh values it'll print.
So we can see uh how things are going.
So let's analyze this. Uh if we want to
know how often we run the inner uh time
there, it's uh about uh the maximum of
128 bit integer times that max times
that max times that max, which is 340
billion billion trillion to the 4th
power, which is uh 10 154
um steps. And if we assumed we had a
computer that could run as fast as the
kind of theoretically fastest computer,
one that can take one step in each uh
plank time unit that uh that computer
could run at 10 to the 50th steps per
year. If we put that together, then we
[04:13]
can run 10 to the 104
sorry then this program would take 104
years um to finish running.
So scientists um think that our universe
will be around for about another 10 to
the 100 years. Uh we put those two
together and we see that we've got a
program that will run 10,000 times uh
longer than the length of the universe.
Uh and another consideration is these
nested loops only use 64 um bytes of uh
memory for the for the four variables.
But uh this computer has uh 64 GB. And
if we were to use all that memory for
variables, then we could write a program
in this style that would run for 10 to
the 165 billion years.
um of computation. So uh looking at our
[05:13]
criteria, this program halts, it's uh
short and it uses bounded memory. Uh and
the reason I put a question mark on
bounded memory is because maybe it would
be interesting to relax that constraint
and see what we can do if we allow
unbounded memory. So let's do that. And
we'll call that rule set three.
So in rule set three, our program must
halt as before. And we've got this new
thing, unbounded memory, and we'll
require it to be initialized uh all all
with zero. So we can't encode uh uh
anything in there. And the way we'll
look at this, at least at first, is
we'll look at it not with a regular
computer, but with an abstract computer
called a touring machine.
And a touring machine
uh is this mathematical construction.
And one of its parts is that it has an
unbounded tape. So consider that a tape
uh running uh in both directions for as
[06:16]
long as we uh need um starting all with
uh zeros. And each cell in the tape can
only hold uh a zero or a one.
Uh if you look at the little triangle on
the picture, that's the read write head.
So it can read a zero or a one. It can
then write into that same cell a zero or
a one. And then the head can move uh one
position either to the left or to the
right.
Uh we also allow our uh this abstract
computer to have uh an internal state
and this first one we're going to
require it to have uh uh just five uh
possible values. So that's like a rust
enum with values A, B, C, D, and E. Um,
we're also going to
have an additional state called H. That
stands for halt. And we don't count that
when we're counting how many states we
have. So this still only counts as five
state.
[07:17]
Putting that together, a program is just
a table that goes from the two possible
input symbols zero or one and uh the
five possible states A, B, C, D, and E,
and gives a triple uh and the triple is
what value to write, whether to move
left or right, and what state uh to move
into. And if you look at this uh sample
program, you can see that if we read a
zero and we're in state E, um then we'll
move into a halt state. So um that just
shows how we uh make our programs
terminate.
Uh let's see a touring machine uh run a
little bit. We always start in state A.
We have a program. The head is reading a
value. it reads a zero. So we look in
the table and if we have zero in state A
then we do one RB. We write a one, we
move to the right and we move to state
[08:20]
B. And indeed that's what we do. Uh and
now we're in state B and we read a zero.
So zero state B we should write a one,
move to the right and move to state C.
Uh and so on. I won't keep writing the
program but let's uh think about how we
can look at the results of the program.
At each step we have uh uh a generation
of our tape. We can think about the
previous generations and the uh and keep
running and see what the generations to
come are. Um, this isn't something that
we necessarily can store in memory, but
at least abstractly, uh, we can think
about each generation, each step of the
tape. And if we want that picture to be
a little prettier, we can turn all the
ones into some color, uh, here, orange,
and we can turn the zeros into some
background color. And that gives us a
nice uh visualization of what the
[09:21]
touring machine is doing step by step by
step by step by step. Uh let's run it a
few more steps. And the very bottom row
you see there means there's a bunch of
zeros and then a block of ones and then
a bunch more uh uh zeros.
We can widen it. This isn't anything to
do with the touring machine itself. This
is just me stretching out the previous
diagram so it fits the screen better.
Um, and we can run more steps. So, here
we're at 100. There's a 100 steps.
5,000
10,000
I'm accelerating it uh 47 million and
[10:24]
So, uh,
what we saw and kind of surprising was
that this little program that we see
right in the corner, um, runs for
steps and then it just stops. Um, which
I find remarkable. Even more remarkable
is the fact that there is no halting
five-state touring machine that runs uh
any longer. Uh that amazing fact uh was
proven by a group of uh amateur
researchers organized at the site
busybeaverchallengeben.org
or uh just a couple years ago and a
preprint of the research paper showing
their results came out uh just two days
ago. Uh
it's easy to see that the program runs
for 47 million steps. What's very hard
[11:24]
to see is that there's no other uh
comparable program with just five states
that uh doesn't run longer. Um and that
was the the key to their uh to their
mathematical proof. pro they were able
to mathematically prove it and that
proof was uh computerverified so we can
have confidence that it's true.
So I said we were going to write Rust
programs that run longer and longer and
now I've been only showing you a touring
machine but in fact it's very easy to
turn a touring machine into a Rust
program because it's very easy to write
a Rust interpreter for a touring
machine. um super straightforward, it's
fast, it's simple, it uses a fixed
amount of memory except that somehow we
have to model um this infinite tape. And
the way I chose to do it would be was to
have two uh uh U8 uh vectors uh one
going in the um non- negative location
uh direction and one for the negative
direction.
[12:25]
And that worked great. And that gave me
uh a program that halts which was one of
our requirements. It the program is very
short. We can just look at the touring
machine table there. That's the whole
program. Uh it uses this new uh Luther
constraint that we have unbound memory.
But notice the amount of memory actually
used if it halts will still always uh uh
be finite. Um, but kind of
disappointingly, it only run ran for 47
million steps, which wasn't even uh
nearly as far as we got with rule set
two uh with our loops.
So, the next question is, can we change
something about what we did to let us uh
create a touring machine that runs uh
even longer? And remarkably, all we need
to do is add one more state. Uh before
we had state A, B, C, D, and E. And now
we have state A, B, C, D, E, and F. And
[13:26]
a new program. And if we run this
program for 284
uh steps, this is what the uh the
touring uh machine tapes will look like.
Uh let's run it a bit longer.
So, uh, 100,000 steps, a million steps,
10 million, 100 million, a billion,
a 100red billion, a trillion, 10
trillion steps, and then the video
stops.
So, did this program really run for
exactly this round number of 10 trillion
and then halt? Uh, the answer is no. Uh,
the abstract program would still keep
running. I just got tired of doing the
visualizations and told it to stop uh at
So, how far would this run and would it
halt? Yes, this simple program halts at
[14:27]
10 to the up arrow up arrow 15 steps.
That's
notation that means 10 raised to the 10
raised to the 10 raised to the 10
stacked 15 times. uh that's an operation
called uh tetration.
So let's uh review a little bit
exponential notation. Uh 10 to the first
power is 10. 10^ the 100th power is uh
10 billion.
10^ the 10 to the 10 is 10 raised to the
10 billion. So that's really really big.
10 to the up arrow up arrow 4 is 10^ the
10^ the 10^ the 10. That's more than the
number of atoms in the observable
universe. And we can say 10 to the up
arrow up arrow 15 is a number so big
that it's annoying to represent in
exponential notation. So that's uh
pretty big. Um three years ago uh one of
the researchers involved in the busy
[15:27]
beaver challenged proved that this
touring machine halts after running 10
to the up arrow up arrow 15 uh uh steps
and that was a remarkable thing because
it couldn't obviously uh just run it.
What hasn't been proven and may never be
proven is that it's possible that
there's some other six-state touring
machine that halts and runs even
farther. uh we just don't know. But in
any case, this touring machine is easily
uh interpreted in Rust and we can just
run it. And if we do that, then we get a
Rust program that halts um that is short
that uses unbounded memory that runs for
10 to the up arrow up arrow 15 steps,
which is uh way more than we got with
the uh with the with the nested loops we
saw before.
But the only thing and I'd say the only
downside to this uh as far as our uh
[16:28]
what we might want is it's very hard to
see that it runs that far. Uh the effort
involved improving it was uh uh quite
extensive. So it it's not
understandable.
So that brings us to our next rule set.
Let's see if we can create a plain rest
program that halts that has this
unbounded zero initialized memory but
that we can also understand and
specifically what we're going to do is
we're going to try to compute 10 to the
up arrow up arrow 15 without using a
touring machine just using plain rust in
a way that it's obvious that it's doing
uh the right thing and taking uh at
least that many steps.
Our strategy will be based on something
that you may have seen before and that's
uh the way that it's possible to define
addition in terms of the increment
operation and then define uh
[17:28]
multiplication in terms of the addition
operation and then define exponentiation
in terms of uh repeated multiplication
and finally this titration we can define
in terms of repeated exponentiation.
And we'll look at the first uh step in
that uh stack first is uh increment. And
the thing we'll need for this to work is
uh something to represent our unbounded
uh memory. And for that we'll use uh an
infinite precision integer package
called num uh bigend.
And we'll define an increment function
and it'll have a mutable reference
that's an input output variable in Rust
called uh increment accumulator.
Uh we'll send a big int as increment
accumulator. We'll just add one to it
and then it'll be available after the
[18:29]
program finishes uh with uh one greater
value. And we can see that run. we can
just uh set a big int to four uh
increment it and then print the result
and if we do that we'll see that the uh
uh the increment of four is indeed uh uh
five. So increment is pretty
straightforward. Uh the important thing
here is um that we're using these
unbounded integers.
um we're rest within our function in
this case increment we're going to
restrict what uh operations we can do.
So the only things we're going to allow
is initialization
to uh zero uh to do an in place
increment or decrement and to do a
comparison but only comparisons uh uh
with zero.
Specifically, we're going to prohibit
um any copying or cloning. We're not
going to allow arbitrary arithmetic
because among other things that often
[19:31]
creates temp values which would require
uh a full uh a full temp uh I mean sorry
a full uh copy or clone. So no other
arithmetic.
Okay, we have increment. Let's see how
uh we can use uh how uh addition can be
defined as repeated increment. Pretty
straightforward. We have some small
number a that we want to add to our add
accumulator which is a a big int. And
all we have to do is do a loop a times
and each time in that loop we'll do our
in place uh increment to add accumulator
and then at the end add accumulator will
be uh a more than it was before. So
we'll have added a to uh to add
accumulator. Um notice I didn't call the
increment function that we defined
previously. Instead, I just uh we just
inlined it uh manually and that makes it
[20:31]
easier to see what we're doing.
Okay, this is the most important uh
slide to understand uh what we're doing
here. Uh and that's we're going to
define multiply as repeated addition.
So, we have a that we want to um uh
multiply into our multiply accumulator.
And the first thing we're going to do is
set our add accumulator to zero. And
then we're going to loop multiply
accumulator times. And then each time
within that loop, we're going to add a
to the add accumulator. So if we do that
multiply accumulator times then add
accumulator will be the product of a and
the uh original multiply accumulator
then at our very last step we'll move
add accumulator uh into multiply
accumulator so we get the uh the return
[21:31]
value um that we want and uh notice that
this is a move uh not an allocation
we're using rust uh move semantics
So, we're not doing a clone or a copy.
Um, there
um I need to explain what that countdown
uh is. It's a uh uh trait method that I
defined on top of the uh the big
integers. uh it creates an iterator so
that that on each uh uh time it's called
it'll decrement the big integer it has
by one and if the value is not zero
it'll return sum uh just the placeholder
unit value. So it'll return sum all
those times every time it increments and
it's not one and when it finally hits
zero it'll uh return none and the uh uh
the iterator will will stop. So this is
[22:33]
a way to for us for our for loop to
count down whatever our multiply
I'm gonna skip exponentiation because it
works the way you um would think given
the multiplication. But let's look at
the operation on top of that the uh the
tration. So we have uh our input A and
we want to up arrow up arrow it to the
power of treat uh up arrow up arrow it
to trade
uh accumulator
uh and then return the result in the
trade accumulator uh variable. Um it
doesn't make sense for a to be zero here
uh because you can't repeatedly um stack
a bunch of uh zero to the zero to the
zero to the zero. Um that's not defined.
So we rule that out. Um
[23:33]
here's what we'd like to do. We'd like
to set exponentiate accumulator to zero.
Um and then add one because this is the
uh going to tell us uh the power we're
going to go to. So we want it to be at
least uh one and then we loop tetrate
times and then each time we take a to
that power at first to one and then we
assign that to exponentiate accumulator.
So if a was two and we um raised it to
one, the result would be two. And that
would become our exponent for the next
time through the loop. And we'd take two
raised to the two, which is four. And
the next time through the loop, we would
take 2 raised to the 4, which is 16. And
the next time through the loop, we take
two to the 16. And I probably should
know what that is, but I don't remember.
So uh that all would work great. We'll
see a problem. I mean, there is a
problem. We'll address it in a second at
the end. uh exponentiate accumulate
we'll have our answer and as before we
uh move it into tetrate accumulate and
[24:35]
return okay so the problem is I said we
can only do simple arithmetic on these
big in types and here I've got uh uh a
exponentiated uh to it so that breaks
our rules u but obviously what we do is
we just inline our exponentiate
uh function
um that's based like the multiply
function and so on. And that'll uh give
us what we what we want here. And in
fact, this is like real runnable code.
Um you can set a to two. Uh you can set
b to uh uh uh to uh three, a big int
three. And then we can uh trait a to the
uh three and it'll say a sorry two up
arrow up arrow three uh equals 16 which
is the correct answer. Um this is uh
straightforward to run. Be very careful
if you put in uh large numbers. If you
put in large numbers, things will uh um
run either run a long time and you won't
[25:37]
see a result uh or you might run out of
memory because your computer probably
doesn't really have unbounded memory.
So let's compare
this uh trade program to the nested loop
program that we had from rule set uh
two. In both cases,
uh, we had we have four
four loops. The difference is back in
rule set two, each of those loops, uh,
went a static amount of time. Even
though it was a very big number, it was
always uh, uh, the same big number. And
we saw that that uh, ended up running
the inner loop 104
um, times. Now, we still have four for
four for loops, but the amount that the
loops loop uh is dynamic and can be uh
one of these unbounded integers. And
that's really what allows this thing to
keep going and going and going. And you
can't call it with uh 10 and 15. And if
it didn't run out of memory and if you
[26:38]
had much much more time than all the
time in the universe then it would run
uh it would compute 10 to the up arrow
up arrow 15 uh and give the result. Uh
moreover it would do it by incrementing
dump dump one at a time. So you can just
look at the program uh and see that this
program uh uh
uh does at least 10 to the up arrow up
arrow uh 15 steps.
So,
where does this get us on our goals? Um,
I think it's perfect. Uh, it lets us
it's a program that halts. It's still
relatively short. Um, it uses this
looser constraint of unbounded memory.
Now, it's running 10 to the up arrow up
arrow 15 times, which is way more than
we got with rule set two. And uh compare
it to the touring machine uh program,
it's understandable, at least relatively
understandable.
[27:43]
So I can now give advice for anyone who
wants to run their uh Rust program
slowly. If you want your program to run
forever, I recommend you use an endless
loop. If you want it to only use finite
memory and run for an extraordinarily
long time, then do a bunch of nested uh
for loops. If you want the very shortest
program that you can that runs for even
longer um than the uh nested for loops,
then emulate a touring machine. And if
you want something that runs the same
amount of length is a little bit longer
but is easier to understand, then do
But maybe you're not really interested
in running your uh Rust programs slower.
So let's spend a little bit of time uh
looking at uh some techniques for
running a Rust program uh faster. And
the application I'm going to look at is
the visualizer that I used for the ex uh
[28:45]
the examples here. So here's the task
that the visualizer has to do. As the
touring machine emulator runs, we can uh
see the uh the the values of the tape.
Um implicitly there's a history there,
but we um but that history might have 10
trillion steps and on like this uh busy
beaver the six state um touring machine
that we looked at the number of actively
used cells will be about a million wide.
So 10 trillion steps by a million wide
is too much to hold in
um conventional uh uh memory. Um happily
I have a a low memory solution uh to
solve this that is uh only uses memory
proportional to the final output image.
Our output image is going to be
something like a th00and by a thousand
uh monochrome pixels where each value is
[29:45]
going to be a value between uh each
pixel will be just a number between zero
and uh 255
um and each pixel will represent a giant
rectangle from the implicit tape
history. So that like uh it means that
if we had 10 trillion steps then each
pixel represents 10 billion steps and if
it's a million wide that means that each
pixel also represents uh a thousand uh
cells. So each pixel represents 10
billion steps by a thousand cells and is
the average of of those zeros and ones.
Uh so got a a sensible algorithm um that
does that. Uh the only problem with it
is if I want to run it for 10 trillion
steps, it would take uh 2 years and 3
months uh to run. So that was too long.
[30:45]
So I thought about some optimizations.
And I'm going to talk about three of the
optimizations I did. Um and the first
one is uh to use SIMDI which is uh
single instruction multiple uh uh data.
This is a facility on all modern
computer chips called computer chips for
the last 20 years that lets us do
parallel operations mostly they're
mostly simple arithmetic operations but
they only uh uh use one processor. So it
gives us parallelism on just one
processor for as long as we're doing
simple uh arithmetic kind of things. And
the first SIMD operation I did is the
one that takes this tape that say is a
thousand uh cells uh active cells long
and reduces it to a th00and pixels. So
that requires taking a range of the
[31:45]
cells and finding their average. And
there is a nice uh Cindy command called
reduce sum that can in one operation uh
sum uh 64 uh of these cells uh and turn
it into one sum which then we can then
do the division to get the uh average.
So uh reduce sum is a very handy uh SIMD
operation and I and I used it. Another
thing I need to do from time to time is
the uh I generate the picture and I let
it get a little bit longer and then if
it gets too long I shrink it back down
to a th00and by a th00and. So that means
I have to average uh rows two pixel rows
together and turn squish them back into
being a one pixel row. And the main
thing I used for that was just a formula
from uh bit logic that lets you take two
uh uh integer unsigned integer values in
[32:47]
my case 0 to 255 255 and find their
average without having to worry about uh
overflow. And the formula is you take a
and you do logical and with b and you
also take a and you do exor with b shift
it one add those two parts together and
you'll get the average of the two uh
pixel values and doing this with sim I
can apply this operation uh for 64 uh uh
pixels
uh at once uh to get the average and
then it's like five five steps doom 64
done at once. Um the other thing that
happens is the pixel rows my goal is to
only be have them be a thousand but I
let them get almost to 2,000 and then
when they get to 2,000 I shrink them
back um to 1,000. So I have uh pairs of
pixels that I now need to average into
[33:48]
one pixel. Um and there's a wonderful
SIMD operation called D interle which
lets me take 128 uh bytes
128 pixels which are 128 bytes and in
one step turns it into two 64 bit um uh
byte slices where the first one will be
all the uh even bytes and the second uh
slice will be all the uh all the odd
slices. And again that's a
a single uh uh CIDI operation and then I
can uh do other things to to do the
average in in groups.
So um I have some tips for CID
optimization. Uh I really like the
portable standard SIMD library that
comes with Rust. Um its only downside is
that it's a nightly feature. It's not
part of the stable uh uh standard yet,
[34:48]
but its upside is that you can write
this SIMD code and it can automatically
compile for x86, which is what I'm
running at home, for ARM, and even for
WOM. I mean, who would have thought that
WASOM has SIMD support? Uh, but it does.
And this really will make WSOM programs,
this program uh has a mode that runs in
WOM, and it makes it run faster. Uh, if
you'd like to learn more about using
SIMD in your code, I have an article
called nine rules for SIMD acceleration
of your road code. I wrote it like a
year ago and then reread it while I was
doing this. Thought, wow, this is a good
article, just what I wanted, which of
course why I wrote it. Um,
uh, let me call out a a particular
function that's related to the SIMD uh,
library, but it's in a different
namespace. that's super important and
that's the uh as SIMD and SSIMD uh uh
mutate uh operations. And two reasons to
call them out. One, they're really
important and two, they were uh
[35:50]
contributed to the library uh by Scott
uh here from the Rust uh the Seattle
Rust uh user group. So, thank you,
Scott. Um, the other trick I did to make
the SIMD run faster, as I said, the
turing machine has vectors going off in
two directions to represent the uh
unbounded tape. Um, instead of using
vector, I actually switched to using
aligned vector and that meant that I uh
uh that I didn't have to do quite as
much setup uh when I wanted to do the
the uh the SIMD operations on the
vectors. So, that saved a little work
and made things faster.
But how much faster did all this? The
CIDI will make its operations often like
five or six times faster. But the whole
visualization program isn't doing simply
isn't doing those operations all the
time. So the total effect was 40% faster
which is good but still got my uh would
reduce the runtime for doing 10 trillion
[36:51]
visualization steps uh to be one year uh
8 months which is uh still which is
which is still too much. Um
so that still wasn't fast enough. Um,
so here's the second uh speed up I did,
and that was to switch my algorithm for
taking a row of uh uh the tape cells and
turning them into a row
of pixels instead of having it do that
from uh fresh each time uh to make it
incremental. And that's based on the
observation that from one step to the
other um the touring tape can only
change in at most one cell. A zero can
turn into a one or a one can turn into a
zero. And because the tape can only
change in one place when we shrink that
down to rows of pixels only at most one
pixel uh can change.
Um, so instead of recomputing
[37:53]
turning a whole uh uh tape into a row of
pixels, now I copy the previous pixel
row and then recomputee just the one
pixel that might have uh changed. And
that had a really good speed up. That
made things uh at least 25 times faster.
And that got my runtime down to uh
ballpark uh 24 days, which is maybe
almost tolerable.
Um,
but
still wasn't that good. So, the next
thing is, uh, I've got a 16 processor
machine, 16 physical processors, so why
not, uh, uh, use multipprocessing? It
was so frustrating to be running the
visualization
that we uh, saw before and look at my
CPU meter and it's like at three or uh,
7%. It's like I've got all these
processors and they're not doing any
work. Um the problem is that touring
machines are notoriously sequential. Um
[38:54]
I think it's theoretically impossible to
use parallelism um to speed up touring
machines.
So it seemed hopeless and I didn't do
anything about it for a long time. But
then I realized that even though the
touring machine is sequential,
uh, visualization isn't necessarily
sequential and the visualization was
actually 50 times slower than the
touring machine. So I really only needed
to parallelize the visualization step.
Uh, and the way I did that we can see
from the picture. So say this is the
picture that you're working on rendering
uh, with 10
uh, it says 100 trillion. It should say
10 trillion.
Oh maybe well wherever it is this is the
picture you want to render. Um we divide
the the work for rendering this picture
into say 32 parts and then for each of
the parts say part 30 we run the touring
machine in kind of a headless mode
without doing any uh visualization until
it gets to the uh step that corresponds
[39:56]
to the start of that part of the picture
and then it turns on visualization
um does visualization for just that
segment and stops. Um,
and when we're uh
doing visual uh uh and then we have 32
of these images and we can just
carefully stitch them together um to get
uh the main picture. Um and if I do that
then I'll I get this happy um
circumstances where my CPU meter is now
going at at 75 or 98%.
And that makes the whole thing 11 to 15
times faster. So it gets the uh run time
down to the actual runtime was 50 hours
uh 38 minutes and uh 24 seconds.
So with that I set what I believe is a
new world record for doing uh turning
machine uh visualization that does this
uh full pixel averaging. And that's
[40:57]
because I and I did that starting last
Saturday night and it finished uh uh uh
Monday night
and I wanted to set a new record uh for
this uh for the Seattle uh Rust user
group. So as far as I know the old
record was to render out to 10 trillion
steps. So this time I rendered out uh
and visualized to 10 trillion and one
steps and we can see the result here.
[Music]
and there we go 10 trillion and one
visualization steps.
So uh let me end with uh kind of status
[41:57]
and some links. Uh first of all, there
is a Watson version of this and you can
play with it and get access to uh links
with this uh uh QR code.
Uh it uh runs in your phone. It it won't
run to 10 trillion in your phone, but it
will uh uh run in your phone uh or on
your uh uh you know just in a web
browser. It's it's uh kind of cool.
That's the web uh visualizer that's
available on GitHub. Uh also happily if
you go to bbbchallenge.org
uh any page on that website will show a
a touring machine and there'll be three
buttons at the bottom. Uh one of the
buttons says blaze. If you click uh
blaze, that will give you uh this uh
this Rust visualizer. And it doesn't
have as many features as the other uh
visualizers, but it's uh more colorful
and is very very fast uh and can go for
[42:58]
many more steps uh than the than the
other visualizers. Uh the whole project
is available on GitHub. Um there are two
articles. There's an article that covers
this material, how to optimize rust for
slowness and some of these uh speed up
tricks for visualization. And there's
also an article uh on how to uh make uh
SIMD faster. Uh I have a YouTube channel
uh where I just very low uh uh traffic
on, but it is where I put these
visualizations uh uh from time to time.
Uh I'm looking at I've recently added
and looked at two new features. Uh one
the BB challenge uh or has moved from
working on this uh five-state and six
state uh machines. And now they're
looking at three m state machines but
they can write zero one
or two to the tape instead of just zero
[44:00]
and one. And they're also looking at
two state machines that can write zero,
one, two, three, or four uh to the tape.
Um to visualize those requires more than
just monochrome colors. So uh uh I added
a generalization
uh to the visualizer that can handle
multiple colors. And that's uh uh uh
what's running uh now on uh GitHub and
on bbch challenge.org.
Uh, and the other thing I looked at
because of a comment on the uh, Rust
user group discord about compiling
regular expressions, I thought, well,
that sounds useful. How about doing
something not quite as useful? So, I've
recently been working on compiling
the touring machine runs, not the
visualization,
uh, right into X uh, uh, 64 assembly.
And that gets me a speed up. So to
visualize not visualize to emulate 10
[45:01]
trillion steps with a touring machine uh
with Rust was taking like 6 hours um to
do it with uh this with Rust as a host
but running uh this compiled assembly
code uh gets it down to just about uh
one hour. Um so uh that's my talk. Uh
thank you.

=== ROW 79 | f013199 | https://users.rust-lang.org/t/treeshaking-wasm/101515 | 2023-10-22 | users-forum ===
Treeshaking wasm?

@anon80458984 · 2023-10-22T02:30:52.860Z:
I have a Rust/wasm32 binary output of size 5.3M.
This is not too bad concerned to modern JS spa webapps. However, it is a bit surprising.
Besdies modifying Cargo.toml to optimize for size, is there anything else to reduce size? [Perhaps treeshaking unused code?]
Thanks!

---

@CBenoit · 2023-10-22T02:47:38.684Z:
There are many other ways to minimize the size of Rust binaries in general (enabling lto, etc). See this repository for a comprehensive and updated list of techniques: GitHub - johnthagen/min-sized-rust: 🦀 How to minimize Rust binary size 📦
For WASM specifically, you may check the Rust and WebAssembly Book: Shrinking .wasm Size - Rust and WebAssembly
This one wasn’t updated since 2021 however. I especially recommend you to not use wee_alloc as they recommend, this crate is not maintained anymore and there is an unbounded memory leak bug and possibly other bad things lurking in it (you can check the issue tracker for more). An alternative is lol_alloc, but keep in mind that it’s not considered "production-grade" either, use at your own risk.

---

@kpreid · 2023-10-22T02:54:17.995Z:
“Tree shaking” isn't a step you can take here because that's a concept applying to programs distributed in a theoretically editable form (originally Lisp memory images, then JavaScript source code), where you have to choose to discard unused things because the easiest path is to not perform the analysis and keep all of them.
With compiled programs, the linker or the compiler will automatically leave out unused items (unless they are marked as to be kept regardless, such as with #[used] or #[no_mangle]).

---

@anon80458984 · 2023-10-22T03:33:36.473Z:
Is there a "size profiler" of sorts? To output things like
crate foo; file bar.rs is responsible for 100kB of final output size
etc ...

---

@CBenoit · 2023-10-22T03:42:08.502Z:
Yes, twiggy (I still recommend you read the resources I posted above, twiggy was mentioned there)

---

@Release-Candidate · 2023-10-22T04:09:11.366Z:
wasm-opt, either the cli program or Rust library, does shrink the size of Rust generated WASM most(?) of the time.
But if you didn't get to 5MB because of a debug build, the result will still be unusable big.

---

@anon80458984 · 2023-10-22T08:25:49.154Z:
Release-Candidate:
But if you didn't get to 5MB because of a debug build, the result will still be unusable big.
This is a release build.

---

@Michael-F-Bryan · 2023-10-22T17:51:26.173Z:
Sounds like you need to look at your dependency tree and start looking at what you do or don't need. The best way to make your binary smaller is to just not include as much code.

---

@anon80458984 · 2023-10-22T19:01:35.517Z:
Does anything here look particularly offensive ?
anyhow = "1.0.51"
anymap = "0.12.1"
async-channel = "1.9.0"
async-mutex = "1.4.0"
base64 = "0.13.0"
byteorder = "1.4.3"
console_error_panic_hook =    "0.1.7"
field-offset = "0.3.4"
flate2 = "1.0.23"
futures = "0.3.5"
futures-lite = "1.12.0"
futures-signals = { version = "0.3.20", default-features=false, features = [] }
getrandom = { features = ["js" ] , version = "0.2"}
image =                                                    { version = "0.24.7",  default-features=false, features = ["png", "jpeg" ]}
instant = { version = "0.1.11", features = [ "wasm-bindgen"] }
js-sys = "0.3.58"
json = "0.12.4"
jsonrpc-core = "18.0.0"
lazy_static = "1.4.0"
lz4_flex = { version = "0.9.3"  }
memoffset =                   "0.8.0"
nanoserde = "0.1.33"
nanoserde-derive =  "0.1.20"
once_cell = "1.7.2"
regex = "1.5.4"
smallvec = "1.9.0"
tar = "0.4.38"
wasm-bindgen = "^0.2.81"
wasm-bindgen-futures = "0.4.31"
wgpu =                        { version = "0.16.1", features = ["webgl"] }
web-sys = { version = "^0.3.61", features = [
"AbortController",
"AbortSignal",
"AudioContext",
"AudioDestinationNode",
"AudioNode",
"AudioParam",
"BinaryType",
"Blob",
"BlobPropertyBag",
"CanvasRenderingContext2d",
"console",
"CssStyleDeclaration",
"DedicatedWorkerGlobalScope",
"Document",
"DragEvent",
"DynamicsCompressorNode",
"DynamicsCompressorOptions",
"Element",
"ErrorEvent",
"Event",
"EventTarget",
"FileReader",
"GainNode",
"Headers",
"HtmlBodyElement",
"HtmlButtonElement",
"HtmlCanvasElement",
"HtmlDivElement",
"HtmlIFrameElement",
"HtmlPreElement",
"HtmlSelectElement",
"HtmlSpanElement",
"HtmlStyleElement",
"ImageData",
"IirFilterNode",
"KeyboardEvent",
"Location",
"MessageChannel",
"MessageEvent",
"MessagePort",
"MouseEvent",
"Navigator",
"NodeList",
"OscillatorNode",
"OscillatorType",
"PannerNode",
"PeriodicWave",
"ProgressEvent",
"Request",
"RequestInit",
"RequestMode",
"Response",
"ScriptProcessorNode",
"StereoPannerNode",
"Storage",
"UiEvent",
"Url",
"WaveShaperNode",
"WebGl2RenderingContext",
"WebGlBuffer",
"WebglDrawBuffers",
"WebGlFramebuffer",
"WebGlProgram",
"WebGlRenderbuffer",
"WebGlShader",
"WebGlTexture",
"WebGlUniformLocation",
"WebSocket",
"WheelEvent",
"Window",
"Worker",
"WorkerOptions",
"WorkerType"
]}
[target.'cfg(target_arch = "wasm32")'.dependencies]
winit = { version = "0.28.6", default-features = false }
[still figuring out how to read twiggy wasm output]

---

@Release-Candidate · 2023-10-22T19:58:02.566Z:
Dead code would be caught by wasm-opt. But it shouldn't have been included by the LLVM codegen to begin with.

---

@anon80458984 · 2023-10-22T20:32:55.114Z:
cargo build ~9mb
after wasmbindgen cli tools: ~5mb
after wasm-opt: ~3mb

---

@Michael-F-Bryan · 2023-10-23T03:33:24.364Z:
Release-Candidate:
Dead code would be caught by wasm-opt. But it shouldn't have been included by the LLVM codegen to begin with.
Yep. What I'm suggesting is to remove existing code and replace it with something simpler.
Just because it's not detected as dead by the optimiser, doesn't mean it isn't overkill for what you need. The dead code analysis passes also aren't perfect - for example, if I instantiate a trait object but only ever use one method, the other methods will still be marked as used because they need to be put in the vtable. You also have situations which are logically impossible, but not probable, but that's more of a micro-optimisation.
5mb of WebAssembly is pretty chunky, and if you want to cut that down you'll need to start making architecture changes and cutting dependencies.
anon80458984:
Does anything here look particularly offensive ?
It might be better to look at the output from cargo tree because transitive dependencies are a prime candidate for bloat. For example, if jsonrpc-core pulls in tokio, that'll add up quickly.
Similarly, look out for duplicate dependencies, both in versions and functionality.
For example, I can practically guarantee you've already got serde-json in your dependency tree somewhere, so using the json crate means you'll be including two JSON parsers in your project. Similarly, you'll have both nanoserde and serde in your dependency tree, so that's multiple serialisation frameworks.

---

@Release-Candidate · 2023-10-23T04:49:36.150Z:
Michael-F-Bryan:
What I'm suggesting is to remove existing code and replace it with something simpler.
Yes, but I hesitate to suggest "rewrite it in JavaScript, or, if you really don't want to use JS, in a language that compiles to JS, like Purescript or Rescript. And only after profiling maybe use WASM (not necessarily written in Rust) for the long running, performance critical parts." in a Rust forum

---

@anon80458984 · 2023-10-23T05:28:56.974Z:
Is 5MB even unreasonable for ~50k lines of code [not counting dependencies; as counted by cloc] ?
This is what, 100 bytes per ";" ? This actually seems within the limits of reasonableness to me. Especially factoring the blowup from monomorphism and external libraries.

---

@Release-Candidate · 2023-10-23T06:15:34.656Z:
The question isn't if it's unreasonable to use 5MB for a 50k LoC executable (which it is for a size-optimised Version without embedded "resources"), but if you really need that much code for what you are trying to accomplish.
And having megabytes of code (without any other files) is (almost) always way too much for the web. Don't forget that that gigantic WASM-blob isn't something like a "native executable", but has to be interpreted by the browser. Don't get mé wrong, it is nice and interesting as a way to see what is possible using WASM (and Rust), but for "real" use that's not what you want to do.
"People" rightfully complain about the "usual" number of JS's package dependencies, but Rust's package dependency bloat is actually worse by size (maybe not number), it just doesn't matter most of the time, except when it does ;). You have to be really, really careful which crates to use, to keep the number of dependencies small (by size and number).

---

@anon80458984 · 2023-10-23T06:38:45.434Z:
Release-Candidate:
And having megabytes of code (without any other files) is (almost) always way too much for the web. Don't forget that that gigantic WASM-blob isn't something like a "native executable", but has to be interpreted by the browser. Don't get mé wrong, it is nice and interesting as a way to see what is possible using WASM (and Rust), but for "real" use that's not what you want to do.
I'm building a 3D game that runs in the browser. All the code I have written is necessary.
My motivation for optimizing output size is not "how does the end user feel about a 5MB blob" but rather "how much is my CDN going to charge me"

---

@Release-Candidate · 2023-10-23T09:52:46.960Z:
anon80458984:
I'm building a 3D game that runs in the browser.
That's a bit of information that is quite important  For a game to load the user is prepared to wait quite some time (not too much, of course).

---

@jplatte · 2023-10-23T11:18:27.869Z:
You have a few duplications in there:
futures and futures-lite provide mostly the same functionality
async-channel provides mostly the same functionality as futures-channel, which you might pull in through futures (cargo tree -d is your friend)
async-mutex' functionality should also be provided by futures (futures-util)
once_cell provides all the functionality of lazy_static and more
you are pulling in multiple compression libs, can you avoid that? (flate2, lz4_flex)
You could also try replacing futures-signals with eyeball / eyeball-im (my crates), though I only built them to be easier to use, the artifact size might only be marginally better, or worse than futures-signals.

---

@kpreid · 2023-10-23T12:58:36.664Z:
Also try setting default-features = false for all your dependencies and adding explicit features as needed. In most cases this will have no effect on size since it will just remove some already-dead code (though it would decrease compilation time), but in some cases it will allow the library to simplify its code to handle fewer situations.

---

@anon80458984 · 2023-10-23T13:22:49.025Z:
If I'm reading the output of twiggy correctly, the thing that is killing me is naga from wgpu. However, I already have default-features = false on that crate, and both webgl and wgsl are necessary features. [Why the ???? am I bundling a wgsl -> glsl transpiler?]

---

@Release-Candidate · 2023-10-23T13:49:33.509Z:
anon80458984:
Why the ???? am I bundling a wgsl -> glsl transpiler?
WGSL is WebGPU and GLSL is WebGL (which you are using). If you are not supporting WebGPU too, there is no reason to use WGSL.

---

@anon80458984 · 2023-10-23T15:11:18.570Z:
even with webgl + glsl only, wgpu still seems to pull in naga

---

@kpreid · 2023-10-23T15:17:36.680Z:
In order to avoid naga, you need to avoid wgpu-core, which means using wgpu's “direct” WebGPU backend, which means disabling the webgl feature and therefore requiring browser WebGPU support.
I'm not sure whether it would be possible to modify wgpu to allow GLSL-only without naga; I suspect it might not be because wgpu-core needs to rewrite shaders slightly, but I could be wrong. Ask the actual wgpu developers that question.

---

@Release-Candidate · 2023-10-23T15:59:28.502Z:
anon80458984:
even with webgl + glsl only, wgpu still seems to pull in naga
wgpu is a WebGPU crate. If you do not use WebGPU, you don't need it. web-sys is all you need.

---

@anon80458984 · 2023-10-23T17:15:40.757Z:
LOL. Not porting code from wgpu to webgl2. Waiting for webgpu to become more popular, then switching to webgpu entirely and dropping webgl2 support.

---

@nickmertin · 2023-10-27T15:38:05.486Z:
If I'm understanding correctly, you're linking in a WGSL to GLSL transpiler in the actual output binary. If you want to keep your shaders in WGSL, it should be possible to do the transpilation at build time rather than run time, which means the output binary would only contain the translated (and probably minimized) GLSL shaders, rather than the WGSL shaders and the transpiler.

---

@anon80458984 · 2023-10-27T16:52:45.573Z:
Yes. Is there a way to write *.wgsl, compile it to glsl (at build time), and have the wgpu crate (at runtime) not include naga ?

---

@nickmertin · 2023-10-28T19:38:38.613Z:
I am not familiar with these particular libraries, but in general the approach for this kind of thing would be to add the library which is needed for transpilation as a build dependency, rather than (or in addition to) a normal dependency. You can then write a build script, which runs at compile time (cargo builds and runs it for the host machine before invoking the rust compiler on the main source code). That build script would call into the library to do the translation, and store the output in a file which is then incorporated into the program, for example using the include_str! macro.

---

@anon80458984 · 2023-10-28T21:03:23.491Z:
I do not know wgpu internals, so this is likely the blind arguing with the blind.
I suspect I can not drop the naga dependency for the following reason.
Regardless of whether I provide the shaders as wgsl or glsl, wgpu will want to validate the shader / shader descriptors. This requires parsing the shader (at runtime). So at the very least, this requires the parser part of naga to be present at runtime.

---

@simonbuchan · 2023-10-28T23:27:19.068Z:
How much work is replacing the wgpu apis themselves vs the shaders? The latter you could ahead of time use naga on using it's CLI

---

@kornel · 2023-10-29T01:13:06.109Z:
tar — if it's for your assets, you could probably pick a simpler format.
flate2 — browser fetch will decompress data compressed on the HTTP level for you.
image — do you need to decode images yourself? could you make <canvas> do it for you? If you drop flate2, then try dropping png too.

---

@nickmertin · 2023-10-29T02:07:19.605Z:
anon80458984:
I suspect I can not drop the naga dependency for the following reason.
That may be true, but as others in the thread have pointed out, the compiler/linker will automatically exclude binary code for any functions which aren't used. So you'll still be paying the cost of including that dependency in terms of compile time, but likely not (or at least not much) in terms of binary size.

---

@system · 2024-01-27T02:07:47.275Z:
This topic was automatically closed 90 days after the last reply. We invite you to open a new topic if you have further questions or comments.

